Come Tom will you go to a play?
No
Why?
Because there is so many words, and so little wit, as the words tire me more than the wit delights me; and most commonly there is but one good part or humour, and all the rest are forced in for to enterline that part, or humour;
Likewise not above one or two good Actors, the rest are as ill Actors as the parts they Act, besides their best and principle part or humour is so radios, that I hate at last what I liked at first, for many times a part is very good to the third Act, but continued to the fifth is stark nought.
The truth is, that in some Plays the Poets runs so long in one humour, as he runs himself out of breath.
Not only the Poet but the humour he writes of seems to be as broken-winded.
I have heard of a broken-winded Horse, but never heard of a broken-winded Poet, nor of a broken-winded Play before.
I wonder why Poets will bind themselves, so as to make every humour they write, or present, to run quite through their Play.
Bind say you? they rather give themselves line and liberty, nay they are so far from binding, as for the most part they stretch the Line of a humour into pieces.
Let me tell you, that if any man should write a Play wherein he should present an humour in one Act, and should not continue it to the end: although it must be stretched, as you say, to make it hold out, he would be con∣damned, and not only accounted an ill Poet, but no Poet, for it would be ac∣counted as ill as wanting a Rhyme in a Copy of Verses, or a word too short, or too much in a number, for which a Poet is condemned, and for a word that is not spelled right, he is damned for ever.
Nay, he is only damned if he doth not write strictly to the Orthography.
Scholars only damn Writers and Poets for Orthography, but for the others, they are damned by the generality: that is, not only all rea∣ders, but all that are but hearers of the works.
The generality for the most part is not foolishly strict, or rigid as particulars are.
Yes faith, they are led by one Bell-weather like a company of silly Sheep.
Well, if I were to write a Play, I would write the length of a humour according to the strength of the humour and breadth of my wit. Let them judge me and condemn as they would; for though some of the past, and present ages be erroneously or maliciously foolish in such cases; yet the future Ages may be more wise, and better natured as to applaud what the others have condemned.
But prithee Tom let us go.
No, I will not go for the reasons before mentioned, which is, they tire me with their empty words, dull speeches, long parts, tedious Acts, ill Actors; and the truth is, theres not enough variety in an old play to please me.
There is variety of that which is bad, as you have divided it, but it seems you love youth and variety in plays, as you doe in Mistress•.
Plays delights A•sorous men as much as a Mistress doth.
Nay, faith more, for a man and his Mistress is soon out of breath in their discourse, and then they know not what to say, and when they are at a Nonplus, they would be glad to be quit of each other, yet are asha∣med to part so soon, and are weary to stay with each other long, when a Play entertains them with Love, and requires not their answers, nor forces their brains, nor pumps their wits; for a Play doth rather fill them than empty them.
Faith most Plays doth rather fill the spectators with wind, than with substance, with noise, than with news;
This Play that I would have you go to, is a new Play.
But is there news in the Play, that is (is there new wit, fancies, or new Scenes) and not taken our of old stories, or old Plays newly translated.
I know not that, but this Play was writ by a Lady, who on my Conscience hath neither Language, nor Learning, but what is native and natural.
A woman write a Play!
Out upon it; out upon it, for it cannot be good, besides you say she is a Lady, which is the likelier to make the Play worse, a woman and a Lady to write a Play; fie, fie.
Why may not a Lady write a good Play?
No, for a women's wit is too weak and too conceived to write a Play.
But if a woman hath wit, or can write a good Play, what will you say then.
Why, I will say no body will believe it, for if it be good, they will think she did not write it, or at least say she did not, besides the ve∣rye being a woman condemns it, were it never so excellent and care, for men will not allow women to have wit, or we men to have reason, for if we allow them wit, we shall lose our prehemency.
If you will not go Tom, farewell; for I will go set this Play, let it be good, or bad.
Nay stay, I will go with thee, for I am contented to cast away so much time for the sake of the sex. Although I have no saith of the Au•••esses wit.
Many a reprobate hath been converted and brought ••re∣pentance by hearing a good Sermon, and who knows but that you may be converted from your erroneous opinion; by seeing this Play, and brought to co∣confess that a Lady may have wit.
NOble Spectators, you are come to see,
A Play, if good, perchance may clapped be;
And yet our Authoresse says that she hath heard,
Some plays, though good, hath not been so preferred;
As to be mounted up on high raised praise,
And to be Crowned with Garlands of fresh hayes:
But the contrary have been hissed off,
Out from our Stage with many a censuring scoff;
But afterwards there understanding cleared,
They gave the praise, what they before had jeered.
The same she says may to her Play befall,
And your erroneous censures may recall:
But all such Plays as take not at first sight,
But afterwards the viewers takes delight:
It seems there is more wit in such a Play,
Than can be understood in one whole day:
If for, she is well content for her wits sake,
From ignorance repulses for to take;
For she had rather want those understanding brains,
Than that her Play should want wits flowing veins.
Pray, Sir, do not force me to marry a child, before you know whether she will prove virtuous, or discreet; when for the want of that knowledge, you may endanger the honour of your Line and Posterity, with Cuckoldry and Bastardry.
Son, you must leave that to fortune.
A wise man, Sir, is to be the maker or spoiler of his own fortune.
Let me tell you Son, the wisest man that is, or ever was, may be deceived in the choosing a wife, for a woman is more obscure than nature her self, therefore you must trust to chance, for marriage is a Lottery, if you get a prize, you may live quietly and happily.
But if I light of a blank, as a hundred to one, nay a thou∣sand to one but I shall, which is on a Fool or a Whore, her Follies or Adul∣teries, instead of a praise, will found out my disgrace.
Come, Come, she is Rich, she is Rich.
Why Sir, gilded I •o•ns are most visible.
It is better, Son, to have a rich whore than a poor whore, but I hope Heaven hath made her Chaste, and her Father being an honourable, honest, and wise man, will breed her virtuously, and I make no question but you will be happy with her.
But Sir, pray consider the inequality of our ages, she be∣ing but a Child, and I at mans Estate; by that time she is ready for the mar∣riage bed: I shall be ready for the grave, and youths sharp appetites, will no∣ver relish Age, wherefore she will seek to please her palate else where.
Let me tell you, Son, should you marry a woman that were as many years older, than she is younger than you; it were a greater hazard, for first old women are more intemperate than young: and being older than the husband, they are apt to be jealous, and being jealous, they grow maliti∣os, and malice seeks revenge, and revenge disgrace, therefore she would Cuckold you merely to disgrace you.
On the other side, those Women that are married young, Cuckholds there Husbands fems dishonouring them by their ignorant follies, and Childish indiscretions, as much as with Adultery. And I should as soon choose to be a Cuckhold, as to be thought to be one: For my honour will suffer as much by the one as the other, if not more.
Heaven bless the, Son, from jealousy, for thou art horrible afraid of being a Cuckold.
Can you blame me, Sir, since to be a Cuckhold is to be des∣pissed, scorned, laughed, and pointed at, as a Monster worse than nature ever made, and all the Honour that my birth gave me and my education endued me,
my virtue gained me, my industry got me; fortune bestowed on me, and fame enthroned me for: may not only be lost by my wives Adultery, but as I said by her indiscretion, which makes me wonder, how any man that hath a No∣ble Soul, dares marry since all his honour lies or lives in the light heels of his wife, which every little passion is apt to kick away, wherefore good Sir, let me live a single life.
How Son, would you have me consent to extinguish the light of my Name, and to pull out the root of my posterity.
Why Sir, it were better to lye in dark oblivion, than to have a false light to divulge your disgrace; and you had better pull out the root, than to have a branch of dishonour ingrafted therein:
All these Arguments against Marriage is because you would enjoy your Mistresses with freedom; fearing you should be disturbed by a wife.
That needs not, for I observe, married Men takes as much liberty, if not more than Bachelors; for Bachelors are afraid they should challenge a promise of Marriage, and married Men are out of that danger.
Then that is the reason that Bachelors Court Married wives, and Married Men Courts Maids; but howsoever Son, if all Men should be of your mind, there would be no Marring nor giving in Marriage; but all must be in Common.
That were best Sir, for then there could be no Adultery committed, or Cuckolds made.
For shame take courage, and be not a afraid of a Woman.
By Heaven Sir, I would sooner yield up my life to death, thau venture my honour to a women's management.
Well Son, I shall not force you with threats or com∣mands to marry against your will and good liking; but I hope Heaven will turn your mind towards marriage, and sent thee a loving, virtuous and discreet wife.
Bright beauty, may I be Servant.
If I have any beauty, it was begot in your Eyes. And takes light from your commendations.
You are Lady, the Star of your Sex.
No truly, I am but a Meteor that soon goes out.
Preethy Sir Timothy Compliment, and Lady Amorous, do not stand prating here, but let us go a broad to some place to divert the time.
Dear Wagtail, whether shall we go?
Faith let us go to a Play.
Let's go to a Tavern.
What with Ladies!
Why, Ladies have been in Taverns before now.
It were as good to carry them to a Bawdy-house.
As good say you, faith now I think of it, better; it were the only place to pass a way idle time. Come Ladies shall we go.
Whether?
To a Bawdy-house.
O sve! sve! Sir Humphrey Bold; how wantonly you talk?
But would you carry us in good earnest to a Bawdy-house?
Why, do you question it, when every house is a secret Bawdy-house. Na! Let me tell you, there be many Right Worshipful, Nay, Right Honourable, and most Noble Palaces made Bawdy-houses.
Some perchance that are old and ruinous, and the right owners out.
No, some that are new, large, and finely furnished; and the owners stately, proud, scornful, and jeering, living therein.
They should take heed of jeering, least they be jeered, and of being scornful, least they be scorned.
What say you Ladies, are you resolved.
No, No, we will not go with you to such places now; but I will carry you to a young Lady whose Father is newly dead, and hath left her all his Estate; and she is become a great heir.
Perchance Lady she will not receive our visit, if her Father be newly dead.
I perceive you are ignorant of Funeral customs, for wid∣dowes, heirs, and heiresses receives visits whilst the Corpse lies above ground: And they will keep them so much the longer, to have so many more visitants: nay, sometimes they will keep them so long, as there dissembling is perceived, or so long as they stink above ground; for if they bury not the Corpse and set empty Coffins for want of embalming, their miserableness will stench up the Nostrils of their vanity.
Nay by your savour Lady, there are some that are buried whilst they are steaming hot.
Those are only such whose Executors, widows, or widowers, seares they may revive again, and rather than that they should do so, they will bury them alive.
You say rightly true, Sir Humphrey Bold.
Sweet beauties, let us go to see this Rich heiress.
Content.
But Ladies are you acquainted with her.
O no! But you may know that all women rather than want visits, they will go to those they never saw, nor spoke to: but only hears of them; and where they live, and I can direct the Coachman to this Ladies Lodging, wherefore let us go.
I shall not deny to visit a Rich heiress.
I shall waite upon you Ladies, but—
Nay, never make buts, but let's go.
Pray let us call Sir Serious Dumb, to go along with us.
Faith Amorous you love his Company, because he can tell no tales.
Pray call him not, but let him alone: for I dare swear he is inventing of some useless and foolish Art.
Is he so inventive say you, but if his inventions is useless, he invents in vain.
Why may not a Dumb mans Inventions be as good as a blind, for the most usefullest Arts were invented, as the learned saith, by one born blind.
Me thinks a dumb man should not have much wit, for by my troth one that is dumb seems to me like a fool; nay, one that speaks but little: I cannot for my life but condemn him, or her for an Ass.
He may be a fool, although he may chance to light on some inventions; for Arts are oftner produced from chance than wit, but let us go and leave him.
Faith Sir Humphrey Bold, we must call him, or otherwise my friend Amorous will be out of humour.
Doth she love silence so well.
No, no, it is that she loves secrecy so well.
In a minutes time is flown
From a Child, to Woman grown;
Some will smile, or laughing say;
This is but a foolish Play;
By Reason a Comedy, should of one days action be,
Let them laugh and so will I
At there great simplicity;
I as other Poets brings
Several Nations, Subjects, Kings
All to Act upon one stage,
So several times in one Age.
How do you know the Lord Singularity is such a gallant man? For he hath been out of the Kingdom this 7. years; wherefore, you could have no acquaintance, you being yet very young.
Although I have no acquaintance by sight, or experienced knowledge; yet by report I have: for I remembered I heard my Father say, he was the honour of the Age, the glory of our Nation; and a pattern for all mankind to take a sample from, and that his person was answerable to his merits, for he said he was a very handsome man, of a Masculine presence, a Courtly garb, and affable and courteous behaviour; and that his wit was answerable •• his merits, person, and behaviour, as that he had a quick wit, a solid judgment, a ready tongue and a smooth speech.
And did your Father proffer you to be his wife.
Yes, and I remember my father sighing said, he should have died in peace, and his soul would have rested in quiet, if he had been pleased to have accepted of me.
When did your Father proffer you.
When I was but a Child:
He is not married, and therefore he may chance to ac∣cept of you now, if you were proffered.
That were but to be refused again, for I hear he is resolved never to marry, and it will be a greater disgrace to be refused now I am grown to women's Estate, than when I was but a Child, besides my Father is dead, and my marring can give him no content in the grave; unless his soul could view the world and the several actions therein.
So, is his Father dead.
Yes, and I here that is the cause he cares not to return into his native Country.
I have a friend that hath his picture.
Is it a he or a she friend.
A she friend.
Pray be so much my friend, as to get your friends consent to show me the Picture.
Perchance I may get it to view it my self, but I shall never persuade her to lend it you, jealousy will forbid her.
She hath no cause to fear me, for I am not one to make an Amorous Mrs. and I have heard he will never marry.
That is all one; woman hath hopes as much as fears, or doubts what ever men doth vow for, or against.
Pray send to her to lend it you, and then you may show it me.
I will try if she will trust me with it.
O Heaven, grant that the praise my Father gave this Lord whilst in the world he lived, prove not as curses to me his Child, so grieve his soul with my unhappy life.
Madam, now you are become a Mrs. of a Family, you must learn to entertain visitants, and not be so bashful as you were wont to be, insomuch as you had not confidence to look a stranger in the face, were they never so mean persons.
Alas Reformer, it is neither their birth, breeding, wealth, or title, that puts me out of Countenance; for a poor Cobbler will put me as much out of Countenance as a Prince; or a poor Semestress, as much as a great Lady.
What is it then?
Why there are unacustomated faces, and unacquainted humours.
By this reason, you may be as much out of countenance as an unaccustomed Dog, or Cat, that you never saw before; or any other beast.
O no, for mankind is worse natured than boasts, and beasts better natured than men; besides beasts looks not with censuring eyes, nor hears, or listens with inquisitive cares, nor speaks with detracting tongues, nor gives false judgment, or spiteful censures, or slandering reproaches, nor jeers, nor laughs at innocent or harmless Errors, nor makes every little mistake a crime.
Madam, there is a Coachfull of gallants alighted at the gate.
For heavens sake, say I have no desire to be seen.
No, say my Lady is full of grief and is not fit to receive visits.
Where is the Lady Bashful, pray Gentlewoman tell her we are come to kiss her hands.
Will you do us the favour old Gentlewoman, as to let the Lady know we are here.
If I am not so old as to be insensible, this is she.
Is this she, alas good Lady, she is not well, for surely she hath a sit of an Ague upon her, she doth so shake; you should give her a Car∣duus-possit and put her to bed.
Lady, are you sick.
She is sick indeed, if she be speechless.
Madam, pray pull up your spirits, and entertain this honourable Company.
Why is the defect in her spirits.
She is young and bashful.—
No she is angry, because we are strangers unknown unto her; and she takes it for a rudeness that we are come to visit her, there∣fore let us be gone.
Let me tell you, it is mere shamefacedness.
I say no, for those that are angry will shake extremely, and turn as pale as death.
Lady, take courage, and look upon us with a confi∣dent brow.
Lord, Madam I will you make your self ridiculous.
I cannot help it, for my thoughts are consumed in the fiery flame of my blushes; and my words are smothered in the smoke of shame.
O! she speaks, she speaks a little.
Pray Madam leave her at this time, and if you honour her with your Company again, she may chance to entertain you with some confi∣dence.
Pray let me and Sir Humphrey Bold come and visit her once a day, if it be but half an hour at a time, and we shall cure her I warrant thee.
I wish she were cured of this imperfection.
She must marry, she must marry, for there is no cure like a husband, for husbands beget confidence, and their wives are brought a bed with impudence.
By your favour Sir Humphrey Bold, marriage must give way or place to courtship, for there are some wives as simply bashful as Virgins; but when did you ever see, or know, or hear of courtly lovers, or Amorous courtships, to be bashful: Their eyes are as piercing as light, and twinckles as Stars, and their countenance as confident as day; and the discourses is freer than wind.
And your embraces are wondrous kind.
In troth we women love you men but too well, that is the truth of it.
Pray Madam let us go, and not stay to anger this young Lady as we do.
Farewell friend, Sir Humphrey Bold and I will visit your La∣die to morrow.
Pray what may I call your name.
My name is Reformer.
Good Mrs. Reformer, I am heartily glad to see you well.
I thank you Ladyship.
O in what a torment I have been in; hole is not like it.
Have you got the Picture?
Yes, but I have seen handsomet men in my opinion than this Picture doth represent.
I perceive you have no judgment in the Original, nor skill in the Copy; for this Picture is most naturally pencilled, the Painter hath drawn it so lively. That one may perceive his noble Soul to appear through his lovely, and lively Countenance; do but observe it well, and you will see as much as I.
That is impossible, unless I had your heart, for though my skill of the Copy, or shadow, may be as much as yours, yet my affections to the Original is less; which makes my eyes not partial.
What will the owner take for that Picture?
She will not sell it at any rate:
I wish she would, for I would buy it at any price.
She prizes it as highly as you, loving him as much; or well (as you do.)
How know you that?
Because I know she hath given him proofs of her love, which I believe you never did.
You mistake lust for love, ambition, for merit, I love not for the bodies sake, but for the souls pure spirit.
I hear the Lord Singularity hath given the Turks a great de∣feat, he is both a wise, prudent, and valiant man.
Methinkes our Nation should not suffer such a person as he, to hazard his life in the service of other Countries.
O it is an honour to our Nation, to let the world know what gallant men it breeds, besides our Nation is in peace with all the world; and he being active, hates to live idly, and dully at home, although he have a great estate, and is well beloved in his Country.
What command doth the Venetians give him?
He is a General, for he commands a great Army.
Is he married?
No, and it is reported he never will marry, but he loves Mistresses well, which all Soldiers doth for the most part.
Then Italy is the best Country in the world for a soldier, there being the greatest store and most variety of Courtesans, for many of the Italians are, as many are in other Nations, rather Carpet-Knights, then fighting soldiers, they have more skill in setting musical notes, than pitching a bat∣tle; in kissing a Mistresses hand with a good grace, than shooting of a Cannon bullet with a great courage; they can take better aim at a window, than of an enemy. And though they often receive wounds, yet they are from fair Venus, not from cruel Mars.
But Mars soldiers when they skirmish in loves duels, re∣ceives wounds as often from fair Venus, as other men, and Italy hath as many gallant valiant men, bred and born in her, as any other Nation; and there are as many Carpet-Knights in other Nations, as in Italy; and if valiant, and gallant men be endued with virtue, they are not the less to be esteemed; and as for Courtesans, all Nations is stored as much as Italy, but they do not so openly profess it, as those in Italy doth.
For my part, I cannot think they are so good Soldiers as they were in Caesars time.
That may be, for there is no such soldiers as Caesars soldiers were, no not in the world; that is, there are no men so patient, obedienz, careful, industrious, laborious, daring, adventurous, resolute, and active, in these Wars, in this age, as the Romans were in Caesars time; and of all the soldiers, Caesars soldiers were the best, and of all commanders Caesar himself, yet those warriors was not less courtly to the feminine sex, than these of this age; and if you did talk with an understanding Soldier, he would tell you that Amors gave an edge to courage, and that it is a mark of a gallant man, and a brave soldier to be an Amarato; and as for the Courtesans of Italy, if there can be an honest act in a dishonest life, it is that the Courtesans in Italy professes what they are; so that men are, not deceived by them, nor betrayed into marriage; wherein other Nations men are cozened with counterfeit modesty, and drawn into marriage by pretended chastity, and then dishonoured by soul adultery, or shamed by marrying a private Courtesan, not knowing she was so.
I perceive by thee, that Merchants loves a Mistress as well as a Soldier.
Surely by thy talk thou art ignorant of thy own profession, which is to trade, and traffic into all Nations, and with all sorts; but yet, Merchants may be Soldiers if they will, and Soldiers may be Merchants if they please; but the truth is all men in the world are Merchants.
No, beggars are not.
But they are, for they traffic with prayers and praises for alms.
The best Merchants I know are Priests, for they trade into Heaven; and traffic with Jove.
That makes them so poor, for heavens commodity are not saleable on earth.
Dear Nurse and Foster Father, grant to my desires and as∣sist my designs.
What to let you wander about the world like a Vagabond, besides it is against the modesty of your Sex.
Are holy Pilgrims Vagabonds, or is it immodest for the bodies of devout souls to travel to the sacred Tomb to offer penitential tears.
Why, you are no Pilgrim, nor is your journey to a godly end.
My journey will be to an honest end, for though I am loves Pilgrim, yet I shall travel to an honest heart; there to offer my pure affections.
To a deboist man, there to offer your Virginity.
Mistake me not, for though I love beyond a common rate, even to an extreme degree, yet I am chastely honest, and so shall ever be; my grave shall witness my constancy.
Beshrew your tongue wife for speaking so sharply to our young Lady, she was left to our trust, care, and tender usage, and not to be snapped and quarrelled with.
Yes, and you would betray your trust to her childish folly.
No that I would not, neither would I venture or yield up her life to loves melancholy.
Come, Come husband, you humour her too much, and that will spoil her I am sure.
Lord Husband! I can never have your company, for you are at all times writing, or reading, or turning your Globes, or peaking thorough your Prospective Glass, or repeating Verses, or speaking Speeches to your self.
Why wife, you may have my company at any time, Nay, never to be from me if you please, for I am always at home.
It is true, your person is always at home, and fixed to one place, your Closet as a dull dead statue to the side of a wall, but your mind and thoughts are always abroad.
The truth is, my mind sometimes sends out my thoughts like Coy ducks, to bring more understanding in.
You mistake Husband, for your thoughts are like vain, or rather like false Scouts that deceives your understanding, imprisons your sen∣ses, and betrays your life to a dull solitariness.
It is better to live a quiet solitary life, than a troublesome and an uneasy life.
What is a man born for, but to serve his Country, side with his friends, and to please the esseminate Sex.
You say right wife, and to serve his Country, is to find out such inventions as is useful either in Peace or War; and to form, order and settle Commonwealths by Denizing Laws, which none but studious brains ever did, or can do. Tic true, practice doth polish beauty and adorn, but neither lays the Foundation, nor brings the Materials, nor builds the walls thereof; and to side with friends, is to defend Right and Truth with sound arguments and strong proofs, from the tyrannical usurpation of false opinions, vain phantasines, malicious satires, and flattering oratory, and to please the effeminate Sex, is to praise their beauty, wit, virtue and good graces in soft Numbers, and smooth Language, building up Pyramids of poetical praises, Printing their fame thereon, by which they live to After-ages.
Prithee Husband mistake us not, for women cares not for wide mouthed fame; and we take more delight to speak our selves whilst we live, than to be talked of when we are dead, and to take our present pleasures, than to abstain our selves for After-ages.
Well wife, what would you have me do?
Why, I would have you so sociable, as to sit and discourse with our friends and acquaintance, and play the good fellow amongst them.
What need we to have any other friends than our selves; our studies, books and thoughts.
Your studies, books and thoughts, are but dull acquain∣tance, melancholy companions, and weak friends.
You do not wife consider their worth; for books are conversable, yet silent acquaintance, and study, is a wise Counsellor; and kind friends, and poetical thoughts are witty Companions, wherein other So∣cieties and Companies are great inconveniences, and oftimes produces evil effects, as Jealousy, Adultery, Quarrels, Duels, and Death, besides slanders, back•itings and the like.
Truly Husband, you are strangely mistaken; for those So∣cieties as I would have you frequent, doth Sing, Dance, Rally, make Balls Masks, Plays, Feasts, and the like, and also makes Frolics or Rubices, or Plays, at Questions and Commands, Purposes or Riddles, and twenty such like Pastimes and fine sports they have.
But surely Wife you would not like this kind of life, nor I neither; especially if we were in one and the same Company; for perchance you may hear wanton Songs sung, and see amorous glances, or rude or immo∣dest Actions, and when you dance, have a secret nip, and gentle gripe of
the band silently to declare their amorous affections; and when you are at Questions or Commands, you will be commanded to kiss the men, or they you, which I shall not like, neither should you; or if they are commanded to pull of your Garter, which no chaste and modest woman will suffer, nor no gallant man, or honourable husband will endure to stand by to see, and if you refuse, you disturb the rest of the Company, and then the women falls out with you in their own defence, and the men takes it as an affront, and disgrace, by rea∣son none refuses but you; This causes quarrels with Strangers, or quarrels be∣twixt our selves.
It is true, if the Company were not Persons of Quality which were civilly bred; but there is no rude Actions, or immodest behavi∣ours offered or seen amongst them; Besides, if you do not like those sports, you may play at Cards or Dice to pass away the time.
But Wife, let me examine you, have or do you frequent these Societies that you speak so Knowingly, Learnedly and Affecti∣onately of?
No otherwise Husband, but as I have heard, which reports makes me desire to be acquainted with them.
Well, you shall, and I will bear you company, to be an Eye-witness how well you behave your self, and how you profit there∣by.
Pray Husband do, for it will divert you from your too seri∣os studies, and deep thoughts, which feeds upon the health of your body, which will shorten your life; and I love you so well, as I would not have you dye, for this I persuade you to, is for your good.
We will try how good it is.
How shall I keep your Journey secret, but that every body will know of it.
We will give out that such a deep melancholy have seized on her, since her Fathers death, as she hath made a vow not to see any cry∣ture besides your self for two years; As for me, that I have lived so solitary a life with my solitary Master, this Ladies Father, that I have few or no acquain∣tance; besides, I will pretend some business into some other parts of the King∣doom, and I having but a little Estate, few will inquire after me.
So in the mean time I must live solitary, all alone, without, my Husband, or Nurse-childe, which Child, Heaven knows, I love better, than if I had one living of my own.
I am as fond of her, as you are, and Heaven knows, would most willingly sacrifice my old life, could it do her any ser∣vice.
But we endanger her life, by the consenting to this journey, for she that hath been bred with tenderness and delicateness, can never endure the coldes and heats, the dirt and dust that Travellers are subject to; Besides, to be disturbed and broken of her sleep, and to have ill Lodging, or per∣haps none at all, and then to travel a foot like a Pilgrim: Her tender feet will never endure the hard ground, nor her young legs never able to bear her body so long a journey.
Tic true, this journey may very much incommode her, yet if she doth not go to satisfy her mind, I cannot perceive any hopes of life, but do foresee her certain death; for her mind is so restless, and her thoughts works so much upon her body, as it begins to waste, for she is become lean and pale.
Well! Heaven bless you both, and prosper your journey, but pray let me hear often from you, for I shall be in great frights and fears.
If we should write, it may chance to discover us, if our Let∣ters should be opened, wherefore you must have patience.
Reformer, I am little beholding to you.
Why Madam.
Why, you might have told a lye for me once in your life, for if you had not spoke the truth by saying I was the Lady, they came to see; they would never have guest I had been she, for they expected me to have been a free bold Entertainer, as they were Visitors, which is, as I do perceive, to be rudely familiar at first sight.
But to have told a lye, had been to commit a sin.
In my conscience tto please the effeminate Sex, is to praise their beauty, wit, virtue and goa most pious and charitable act in hell∣ping the distressed; Besides, you had not only helped a present distress, but released a whole life out of misery; for as long as I live my thoughts will torment me: O! They wound my very soul already, they will hinder my pious devotions; For when I pray, I shall think more of my bashful beha∣viour, and the disgrace I have received thereby, than of Heaven; Besides, they will starve me, not suffering the meat to go down my throat, or else to choke me, causing it to go awry, or else they will cause a Fever; for in my conscience I shall blush even in my sleep, if I can sleep; For certainly I shall dream of my disgrace, which will be as bad as a waking memory: O! that I had Opium, I would take it, that I might forget all things; For as long as I have memory, I shall remember my simple behaviour, and as for my Page, he shall go, I am resolved to turn him away.
Why madam?
Because he let them come in.
He could not help it, for they followed him at the heels, they
they never stayed for an answer from you, or to know whether you were within or no, and there were a great many of them.
I think there was a Legion of them.
You speak as if they were a Legion of Angels.
Nay, they proved a Legion of Devils to me.
There was one that seemed to be a fine Gentleman, but he spake not a word.
They may be all what you will make them, or describe them, for I could make no distinction whether they were men or women, or beasts nor heard no articulated sound, only a humming noise.
They spake loud enough to have pierced your ears, if strength of noise could have done it, but the Gentleman that did not speak, looked so earnestly at you, as if he would have looked you thorough.
O that his eyes had that piercing faculty, for then perchance he might have seen; I am not so simple as my behaviour made me appear.
I have lost 500. pounds since you went in with the Ladies.
500. Pounds in so short a time.
It is well I lost no more: But yet, that 500. pounds would have bought you a new Coach, or Bed, or Silver Plate, or Cabinets, or Gowns, or fine Flanders-laces, and now its gone, and we have no pleasure nor credit for it, but it is no matter, I have health for it, therefore I will call to my Stewards to bring me some more.
No, do not so, for after the rate you have lost, you will lose all your Estate in short time.
Faith let it go, it is but begging or starving after it is gone, for I have no trade to live by, unless you have a way to get a living, have you any.
No truly Husband, I am a shiftless creature.
Yes, but you may play the Whore, and I the Shark, so live by cozening and cheating.
Heaven defend Husband.
Or perchance some will be so charitable to give us sucked bones from stinking breaths, and rotten teeth, or greasy scraps from fowl hands; But go wife, prithee bid my Steward send me 500. pounds more, or let it alone, I will run on the score, and pay my losings at a lump.
No dear Husband, play no more.
How! not play any more say you, shall I break good Com∣pany with sitting out; Besides, it is a question whether I have power to leave off, now I have once begun; for Play is Witch-craft, it enchants temperance, prudence, patience, reason and judgment, and it kicks away time, and bids him
go as an old bald-pated fellow as he is, also it chains the life with fears, cares and griefs of losing to a pair of Cards and set of Dice.
For Heaven sake pity me! If you consider not your self.
Can you think a Husband considers his wife, when he for∣gets, or regards not himself, when all love is self-love, for a man would have his Wife to be loving and chaste for his honours sake, to be thrifty for his profit sake, to be patient for quiet sake, to be cleanly, witty and beautiful for his pleasure sake, and being thus, he loves her; For if she be false, unkind, pro∣digal, froward sluttish, foolish, and ill-favoured, he hates her.
But if a Husband loves his wife, he will be careful to please her, prudent for her, subsistence, industrious for her convenience, valiant to protect her, and conversable to entertain her, and wise to direct and guide her.
To rule and govern her, you mean wife.
Yes, but a Husbands follies will be but corrupt Tutors, and ill Examples for a wife to follow; wherefore dear Husband, play no more, but come amongst the effeminate Society, you will find more pleasure at less charges.
Well wife, You shall persuade me for this time.
I thank you Husband.
My child, you were best sit and rest your self, you cannot chose but be very weary, for we have travelled a great journey to day.
Truly I am as fresh, and my spirits are as lively, as if I had not trod a step to day.
I perceive love can work miracles.
Are not you Father a weary?
It were a shame for me to be weary, when you are not; But my child, we must change these Pilgrims weeds, when we are out of our own Country; as when we are in Italy, otherwise we cannot pretend to stay in the Venetian Army, but must travel as Pilgrims do to Jerusalem: But it were best we put our selves into Beggars garments until we come into the Army, for fear we should be stripped by Thieves; for I have heard, Thieves will strip Travellers, if their cloths be not all rags.
It is true, and Thieves as I have heard, will rob Pilgrims soonest, finding many good Pilladge, wherefore we will accoutre our selves like to ragged Beggars.
Lord Madam! I hope you are not seriously troubled for being out of Countenance.
Yes truly.
What? as to make you melancholy!
Yes, very melancholy, when I think I have made my self a scorn, and hath endangered my reputation.
Your reputation! Heaven bless you, but your life is so innocent, harmless, chaste, pure and sweet, and your actions so just and honest, as all the Devils in Hell cannot endanger your reputation.
But spiteful tongues, which are worse than Devils, may hurt my reputation.
But spite cannot have any thing to say.
Spite will lye, rather than not speak, for envy is the mother to spite, and slander is the Mid-wife.
Why, what can they say?
They will say I am guilty of some immodest act, or at least thoughts, or else of some heinous and horrid crime, otherwise I could not be ashamed, or out of countenance, if I were innocent.
They cannot say ill, or think ill, but if they could, and did, what are you the worse, as long as you are innocent.
Yes truly, for I desire to live in a pure esteem, and an honou∣rabble respect in every breast, and to have a good report spoke on me, since I de∣serve no other.
There is an old saying, that opinion travels without a Passe-port, and they that would have every ones good opinion, must live in every mans age: But I am very confident, there is none lives or dyes without censures, or detraction; even the Gods themselves, that made man, hath given man power and free will to speak, at least to think what they will; That makes so many Atheists in thought, and so many several factions by disputation, and since the Gods cannot, or will not be free from censures, why should you trouble your self with what others say, wherefore pray put off this indiscreet and trouble∣some humour, for if you would not regard censure, you would be more con∣fident.
I will do what I can to mend.
Child, you must beg of every one that comes by, otherwise we shall not seem right Beggars.
If our necessities were according to our outward appearance, we were but in a sad condition; for I shall never get any thing by begging, for I have neither learned the tone, nor the Beggars phrase to more pity or cha∣rity.
Few Beggars move pity, they get more by importunity, than by their oratory, or the givers charity.
Noble Gentlemen, pity the shiftless youth, and infirm old age that hath no means to live, but what compassionate charity will be∣stow.
You are a young boy, and may get your living by learning to work.
But my Father being very old, is past working, and I am so young, as I have not arrived to a learning degree of age, and by that time I have learned to get my living, my Father may be starved for want of food.
Why, your Father may beg for himself whilst you learn to work.
My Father's feeble legs can never run after the flying speed of pitiless hearts, nor can he stand so long to wait for conscience aims, nor knock so hard to make devotion hear.
I perceive you have learned to beg well, though not to work, and because you shall know my devotion is not deaf, there is something for your Father and you.
Nay, faith boy, thou shalt have some of the scraps of my charity to, there is for thee.
Heaven bless you; and grant to you, all your good desires.
Honourable Lady, let the mouth of necessity suck the breast of your charity to feed the hungry Beggars.
Away you rogue, a young boy and beg! You should be stripped, whipped, and set to work.
Alas Madam, naked poverty is always under the lash of misery, which forces us to work in the quarries of stony hearts, but we find the mineral so hard, as we cannot get out enough to build up a lively∣hood.
Employ your selves upon some other work then.
Good Sir relieve a poor beggar.
Faith boy, I am so poor, as I want relief my self; yet of what I have, thou shalt share with me; there is a penny of my two pence, which is all I have, and Heaven do thee good with it.
I perceive poverty pities poverty, as feeling the like misery, where riches is cruel, and hard-hearted, not knowing what want is.
I perceive wit can work upon every thing, and can form it self into what shape it please, and thy wit plays the Beggar so well, as we needed not to have stored our selves from our own Stocks, but have lived upon the Stocks of others.
But if all Stocks were as insipid as the Ladies, we should have starved, if we had not brought sap from our own home; But Father, I am weighed down with the penny the poor Trades-man gave me.
Why, it is not so heavy.
It is so heavy, as it burdens my conscience, and I shall never be at ease, not be able to travel any farther, until I have restored the penny to the giver again.
How should we do that, for it is as hard and difficult to find out that man, as to find out the first cause of effects.
Well, I will play the Philosopher, and search for him.
But if you should meet him, perchance you will not know he was he.
O yes, for his extraordinary charity made me take particular notice of him.
Most charitable and —
What boy, would thou have the other penny,
Most Noble Sir, I have received from a bountiful hand, a sum of money, and since you were so charitable to divide the half of your store to me, so I desire I may do the like to you.
No boy, keep it for thy self, and thy old Father; I have a Trade, and shall get more.
Pray take it for luck-sake, otherwise I shall never thrive.
Faith I find boy, thou art not as most of the World are; the more riches they get, the more covetous they grow.
Sir, pray take this.
What do you give me here, a piece of Gold?
Yes Sir.
That were extortion, to take a pound for a penny.
No, it is not extortion, since I can better space this pound now, than you could your penny, when you gave it me; wherefore it is but ju∣stice,
Well, I will keep it for thee, and when you want it, come to
me again, and you shall have it: I live in the next street, at the sign of the Holy-lamb.
Pray make use of it, for I may chance never to see you more.
Faith Wife, with sipping of your Gossiping-cups, I am half drunk.
Lord Husband! There were some of the Ladies that drank twice as much as you did, and were not drunk, and to prove they were not drunk, was that they talked as much before they drunk, as after; For there was such a confusion of words, as they could not understand each other, and they did no more, when they had drunk a great quantity of Wine.
That was a sign they were drunk, that they talked less, but how chance that you drank so little.
Truly, Wine is so nauseous to my taste, and so hateful to my nostrils, as I was sick when the cup was brought to me.
I know not what it was to you, but to me it was pleasant, for your Ladies were so gamesome, merry and kind, as they have fired me with amorous love ever since.
Madam, the Lady Wagtail, and other Ladies, have sent to know if your Ladyship were within, that they might come and wait upon you.
Faith Nan, thou art a pretty wench.
What Husband? Do you kiss my maid before my face.
Why not Wife, as well as one of your sociable Ladies in a frolic, as you kiss me, I kiss Nan.
So, and when Nan kisses your Barber, he must kiss me.
Right, this is the kissing frolic, and then comes the stricking frolic, for you strike Nan, Nan gently strikes me, and I justly beat you, and end the frolics with a —
What? a man and his Wife dully alone together! Fie for shame.
Lawful love is the dullest and drouziest companion that is, for Wives are never thought fair, nor Husbands witty.
Your Ladyship is learned in loves Societies.
Yes that I am, for I have observed, that if there be a matched company, every man having a woman, their conversation is dull, every mans tongue whispering in his Mistress ear, whilst the women are mute, listening to that which is whispered unto them; but let there be but one man amongst a company of women, and then their tongues runs races, striving with each other, which shall catch that one man, as the only prize, when the weaker wits runs themselves strait out of breath.
And must not one man run against them all.
O yes? and many times his wit beats them all.
Faith Lady? They must not be such strong winded wits as yours is, which is able to beat a dozen Masculine wits out of the field.
You are pleased to give me a complement.
The merry God have mercy on you? What makes you so melancholy.
I am not well to day.
If you are troubled with melancholy vapours, arising from crude humours, you must take as soon as you wake after your first sleep, a draught of Wormwood-wine, then lye to sleep again, and then half an hour before you rise, drink a draught of Jelly-broth, and after you have been up an hour and half, eat a White-wine-caudle, then a little before a dinner, take a Toste and Sack, and at your meals, two or three good glasses of Clarret-wine; as for your Meats, you must eat those of light digestion, as Pheasant, Partridges, Cocks, Snipes, Chickens, young Turkeys, Pea-chickens and the like; And in the After-noon, about four or five a clock, you must take Naples-bisket dipped in Ippocrass, which helps digestion much, and revives the spirits, and makes one full of discourse, and not only to discourse, but to discourse wit∣tily, and makes one such good company, as invites acquaintance, and ties friendship.
Faith I will tell your Wife what you say.
That is fowl play, and not done like one of the Society, espe∣cially when my Lady is not well.
What? Is she sick! I lay my life she hath eat too much Bran Sturgeon, or Sammon without muskadine or Sack, or N•ats-tongues, Bakon and Anchovies, Caviar, or Lobsters, without Rhenish-wines, or Oy∣sters, or Sausages without Clarret-wine, or hath she eaten Potatoe-pies with∣out dates, Ringo-roots, Marrow and Chestnuts, have you not? i saith confess.
No indeed.
Why? I hope you have not taken a surfeit of White-meats, those childish meats, or with Water-grewel, Ponado, Barley-grevvel, those Hodge-podgely meats.
Neither.
Why, then you have over-heated your self with dancing
or fretting and vexing your self at your ill fortune at Cards; or your Tailor hath spoiled some Gown, or your Coach-man was out of the way when you would go abroad; is it not so.
No.
Why? Then your Husband hath crossed some design, or hath angered you some other way.
Faith Amorous, thou hast found it out! Sir Peaceable Studious you are to be chidden to anger your Wife; wherefore tell us how you did anger her, when you did anger her, and for what you did anger her.
Dear, sweet, sine, fair Ladies! be not so cruel to me, as to lay my Wives indisposition to my charge.
But we will, and we will draw up an Accusation against you, unless you confess, and ask pardon.
Will you accuse me without a Witness?
Yes, and condemn you too.
That were unjust! if Ladies could be unjust.
O Madam! we have a witness? her blushing is a sufficient witness to accuse him; Besides, her melancholy silence will help to condemn him.
Pardon me Ladies, for when any of our Sex are offended, or angered, whether they have cause or not, they will rail louder than Ioves thunder.
So will you in time.
Let us jumble her abroad; Come Madam! we will put you out of your dull humour.
No Madam? Pray excuse me to day; in truth I am not well.
No, let us let my Lady alone, but let us take her Husband, and tutor him
Ladies, give me leave to praise my self, and let my self, and let me tell you? I am as apt a Scholar, as ever you met with, and as willing to learn.
Farewell Madam, we will order Sir P. Studious, and try what disposition he is of, and how apt to be instructed.
Pray do Madam, he promises well.
Now we are come into the Army, how shall we demean our selves like poor Beggars.
By no means, for though you beg well, yet you will never get
what you come for with begging, for there is an old saying, that although all charity is love, yet all love is not charity.
It were the greatest charity in the World, for him to love me; for without his love, I shall be more miserable than poverty can make me.
But poverty is so scorned and hated, that no person is accep∣ted which she presents; Nay, poverty is shunned more than the Plague.
Why? it is not infectious.
Yes faith, for the relieving of necessity, is the way to be im∣poverished.
But their rewards are the greater in Heaven.
It is true, but their Estates are less on earth.
But blessings are more to be desired than wealth.
Well? Heaven bless us, and send us such fortune, that our long journey may prove successful, and not profitless, and because Heaven no∣ver gives blessings, unless we use a prudent industry; you shall put your self into good clothes, and I will mix my self with his followers and servants, and tell them, as I may truly, that you are my Son, for no mans Son but mine you are, was so importunate, as you would never let me rest, until I brought you to see the Lord Singularity, and they will tell him, to let him know his fame is such, as even young children adore him, taking a Pilgrimage to see him, and he out of a vain-glory will desire to see you.
But what advantage shall I get by that.
Peace! here is the General.
The enemy is so beaten, as now they will give us some time to breath our selves.
They are more out of breath than we are, but the States are gene∣rous enemies, if they give them leave to fetch their wind, and gather strength again.
Father, stand you by, and let me speak.
From whence come thou boy?
From your native Country.
Came thou lately?
I am newly arrived.
Pray how is my Country, and Countrymen, live they still in happy peace, and flourishing with plenty.
There is no noise of war, or fear of famine.
Pray Jove continue it.
It is likely so to continue, unless their pride and luxury be gets a factious child, that is born with war, and fed with ruin.
Do you know what faction is?
There is no man that lives, and feels it not, the very thoughts are factious in the mind, and in Rebellious passions arises warring against the soul.
Thou can not speak thus by experience boy, thou art too young, not yet a mans Estate.
But children have thoughts, and said to have a rational soul, as much as those that are grown up to men; but if souls grow as bodies doth, and thoughts increases with their years, then may the wars within the mind be like to School-boys quarrels, that falls out for a toy, and for a roy are friends.
Thou speak like a Tutor, what boyish thoughts so ever thou hast; but tell me boy? what made thee travel so great a journey.
For to see you.
To see me boy!
Yes, to see you Sir; for the Trumpet of your praise did sound so loud, it struck my ears, broke open my heart, and let desire forth, which restless grew until I travelled hither.
I wish I had merits to equal thy weary steps, or means for to re∣ward them:
Your presence hath sufficiently rewarded me.
Could I do thee my service boy?
A bounteous favour you might do me Sir?
What is that boy?
To let me serve you, Sir.
I should be ungrateful to refuse thee, chose thy place.
Your Page, Sir, if you please.
I accept of thee most willingly.
But Sir? may not this boy be a lying, cozening, flattering dissem∣bling, treacherous boy.
Why Captain, there is no man that keeps many servants, but some are liars, and some treacherous, and all flatterers; and a Master receives as much injury from each particular, as if they were joined in one.
I can bring none that will witness for my truth, or be bound for my honesty, but my own words.
I desire none, boy, for thy tongue sounds so sweetly, and thy face looks so honestly, as I cannot but take, and trust thee.
Heaven bless your Excellence, and fortune prosper you, for your bounty hath been above my hopes, and equal to my wishes.
What is thy name?
Affectionate my Noble Lord.
Then follow me Affectionate.
Madam, there was a Gentleman gave me this Letter, to deliver to your Ladyships hands.
A Letter I pray Reformer open it, and read it, for I will not receive Letters privately.
The superscription is for the Right Honourable, the Lady Bash∣full; these present.
Since I have had the honour to see you, I have had the unhappiness to think my self miserable, by reason I am deprived of speech, that should plead my suit, but if an affectionate soul, chicle thoughts, lawful desires, and a fervent heart can plead with∣out speech, let me beg your favour to accept of me for your servant; and what I want in Language, my industrious observance, and diligent service shall supply; I am a Gentleman, my breeding hath been according to my birth, and my Estate is suffi∣cient to maintain me according to both; As for your Estate, I consider it not, for were you so poor of fortunes goods, as you had nothing to maintain you, but what your merit might challenge out of every purse; yet if you were mine, I should esteem you richer than the whole World, and I should love you, as Saints love Heaven, and adore you equal to a Deity; for I saw so much sweetness of nature, nobleness of soul, purity of thoughts, and innocence of life, thorough your Bashful countenance, as my soul is wedded thereunto, and my mind so restless; therefore, that unless I may have hopes to enjoy you for my Wife; I shall dye,
Now Reformer, what say you to this Letter?
I say it is a good honest, hearty affectionate Letter, and upon my life, it is the Gentleman I commended so; he that looked so seriously on you; and your Ladyship may remember, I said he viewed you, as if he would have looked you thorough, and you made answer, that you wished he could, that he might see you were not so simple, as your behaviour made you appear, and now your wish is absolved.
What counsel will you give me in this cause?
Why? write him a civil answer.
Why should I hold correspondence with any man, either by Letter, or any other way, since I do not intend to marry.
Not marry?
No, not marry.
Why so?
Because I am now Mistress of my self, and fortunes, and have a free liberty; and who that is free, if they be wise, will make themselves slaves, subjecting themselves to another humour, unless they were fools, or mad, and knew not how to chose the best and happiest life.
You will change this opinion, and marry, I dare swear.
Indeed I will not swear, but I think I shall not, for I love an easy, peaceable and solitary life, which none enjoys but single persons; for in marriage, the life is disturbed with noise and company, troublesome employ∣mints, vexed with crosses, and restless with cares; Besides, I could not endure to have Parteners to share of him, whom my affections had set a price upon, or my merit, or beauty, or wealth, or virtue had bought.
So, I perceive you would be jealous, if you were married.
Perchance I might have reason, but to prevent all inconve∣niences, and discontents, I will live a single life.
Do what likes you best, for I dare not persuade you any way, for fear my advice should not prove to the best.
Now you are placed according to your desire, what will you command me to do?
Dear Foster Father, although I am loath to part from you, yet by reason I shall suffer in my estate, I must entreat you to return home, for my Nurse your wife, hath not skill to manage that fortune my Father left me; for she knows not how to let Leases, to set Lands, to receive Rents, to repair Rue∣ins, to disbursed Charges, and to order those affairs as they should be ordered, which your knowledge, industry and wisdom will dispose and order for my ad∣vantage.
But how if you be discovered.
Why, if I should, as I hope I shall not, yet the Lord Singu∣larity is so noble a person, as he will neither use me uncivily, not crew∣elly.
All that I fear is, if you should be discovered, he should use you too civilly.
That were to use me rudely, which I am confident he will not do, and I am confident that you do believe I will receive no more civility (if you call it so) than what honour will allow and approve of.
But jealousy will creep into the most confident breasts some∣times, yet I dare trust you, though I fear him.
I hope there is no cause to fear him, or doubt me, wherefore dear Father, let us go and settle our affairs here, that you may return home to order those there.
In truth wife, it is a great misfortune you should be sick this Term-time, when the Society is so much increased, as it is become a little Common-wealth.
If there be so many, they may the better spare me.
It is true, they can spare your company, but how can you want their companies.
You shall be my Intelligencer of their pastimes.
That I will wife, but it will be but a dull recreation, only to hear a bare relation.
As long as you partake of their present pleasures, and pleasant actions, what need you take care for me.
Yes, but I must in Justice, for since you have cured me of a studious Lethargy, I ought to do my endeavour to divert your melancholy; and there is no such remedy as the Society; wherefore dear wife, fling off this melancholy sickness, or sick melancholy, and go amongst them; for surely your sickness is in your mind, not in your body.
What, do you cry Wife, who hath angered you?
Why you.
Who, I angered you I why I would not anger a woman, no, not my Wife for the whole World, If I could possible avoid it, which I fear cannot be avoided, for if I should please out of your Sex, I should be sure to displease another: — But that is my comfort, it is not my fault; but dear Wife, how have I offended you.
Why did you kiss my maid before my face.
Why did you persuade me.
Did I persuade you to kiss my maid.
No, but you did persuade me to be one of the Society and there is kissing, and I thought it was as well to kiss your maid before your face, as a sociable Lady before your face.
And why do you make love to the Ladies, since I suffer none to make love to me.
No, for if you did, I would fling you to death, to be im∣braced in his cold arms; Besides, those actions that are allowable and seemly, as manly in men, are condemned in women, as immodest, and unbecoming, and dishonourable; but talking to you, I shall miss of the pleasant sports, and therefore, if you will go, come, the Coach is ready.
No, I will not go 〈…〉u.
Then I will go without you.
No, pray Husband go no more thither.
How! not to go? nor to go no more, would you desire me from that which you persuaded me to; Nay, so much as I could never be quiet, disturbing my harmless studies, and happy mind, crossing my pleasing thoughts with complaining words, but I perceive you grow jealous, and now you are acquainted, you have no more use of me, but would be glad to quit my company, that you may be more free abroad.
No Husband, truly I will never go abroad, but will inancor my self in my own house, so you will stay at home, and be as you were before, for I see my own follies, and am ashamed of my self, that you should prove me such a fool.
Do you think me so wise and temperate a man, as I can on a sudden quit vain pleasures, and lawful follies.
Yes, or else you have studied to little purpose.
Well, for this day I will stay at home, and for the future∣time I will consider.
This boy that came but the other day, hath got more of my Lords affection, than we that have served him this many years.
New-comers are always more favoured than old waiters; for Masters regards old Servants no more, than the Imagery in an old suit of Hang∣ing, which are grown threed-bare with time, and out of fashion with change; Besides, new Servants are more industrious and diligent than old; but when he hath been here a little while, he will be as lazy as the rest, and then he will be as we are.
I perceive my Lord delights to hear him talk, for he will listen very a tentively to him, but when we offer to speak, he bids us to be silent.
I wonder he should, for when we speak, it is with gravity, and our discourse is sententious, but his is mere squibs.
Gentlemen, my Lord would have one of you to come to him.
Why, I thought you could supply all our places, for when you are with him, he seems to have no use of us.
It shall not be for want of will, but ability, if I do not serve him in every honest office.
So you will make some of us knaves.
I cannot make you knaves, unless you be willing to be knaves your selves.
What, do you call me knave?
I do not call you so.
Well, I will be revenged, if I live.
Madam, I have inquired what this Sir Serious Dumb is, and it is said he is one of the finest Gentlemen in this Kingdom, and that his va∣lore hath been proved in the wars, and that he is one that is very active and dexterous in all manly exercises, as riding, fencing, vaulting, swimming, and the like, Also that he is full of inventions, and a rare Poet, and that he hath a great Estate, only that he is dumb, and hath been so this twelve years and up∣wards.
Reformer. What makes you so industrious to inquire after him, surely thou art in love within.
In my conscience I liked him very well, when he was to see you.
The truth is, he cannot weary you with words, nor anger you in his discourse, but pray do not inquire after him, nor speak of him; for people will think I have some design of marriage.
I shall obey you, Madam.
Affectionate, Thou art one of the diligent'st boys that had.
How can I be otherwise, Sir, since you are the Governor of my soul, that commands the Fort of my passion, and the Castle of my ima∣ginations, which are the heart, and the head.
Do you love me so much?
So well my Lord, as you are the archetectour of my mind, the foundation of my thoughts, and the gates of my memories, for your will is the form, your happiness the level, and your actions the treasury.
Thy wit delights me more, than thy flattery persuades: for I cannot believe a boy can love so much; Besides, you have not served me so long, as to beget love.
I have loved you from my infancy, for as I sucked life from my Nurses breast, so did I Love from fems, drawing your praises forth, as I did milk, which nourished my affections.
I shall strive; boy, to require thy love.
To requite, is to return love for love.
By Heaven? I love thee, as a Father loves a son.
Then I am blessed,
What is this boy that our General is so taken with.
A poor Begger-boy!
Can a poor Begger-boy merit his affections?
He is a pretty boy, and waits very diligently.
So doth other boys, as well as he, but I believe he is a young Pimp, and carries, and conveys Love-letters.
Like enough to, for boys are strangely crafty in those employments, and so industrious, as they will let no times nor opportunities slip them, but they will find ways to deliver their Letters and messages.
Sir, I dare not direct you to my Lady, as you desire me in this Note, and if I should tell her, here is a Gentleman that desired to visit her, she would refuse your visit.
I will direct you to the room wherein my Lady is, but I must not be seen, nor confess I showed you the way.
Come Affectionate, sit down and entertain me with thy sweet discourse, which makes all other company troublesome, and tedi∣os to me, thine only doth delight me.
My Noble Lord? I wish the plat-form of my brain were a Garden of wit, and then perchance my tongue might present your Excellen∣cies with a Posy of flowery Rhetoric, but my poor brain is barren, wanting
Thou hast an eloquent tongue, (and a gentle soul.)
My Noble Lord, I have hardly learned my native words, much less the eloquence of Language, and as for the souls of all mankind, they are like Commonwealths, where the several virtues, and good graces are the Citizens therein, and the natural subjects thereof; but vices and follies, as the thievish Borderers, and Neighbour-enemies, which makes inroads, factions, mutinies, intrudes and usurps Authority, and if the follies be more than the good graces, and the vices too strong for the virtues, the Monarchy of a good life falls to ruin, also it is endangered by Civil-wars amongst the pas∣sions.
What passions endangers it most?
Anger, malice, and despair.
Were you never angry?
I am of too melancholy a nature, to be very angry.
Why? are melancholy persons never angry?
Very seldom, my Lord, for those that are naturally melanchol∣lie, doth rather grieve, than fret, they sooner wast into sighs, than fly about with fury; more tears flows thorough their eyes, than words pass thorough their lips.
Why should you be melancholy?
Alas, nature hath made me so; Besides, I find there is not much reason to joy, for what we love, perchance it loves not us, and if it doth, we cannot keep it long, for pleasures passes like a dream; when pains doth stay, as if eternal were.
Thou art composed with such harmony, as thy discourse is as delightful music, wherein the soul takes pleasure.
Madam, now the Gentleman is here, you must use him civilly, and not strive to run away from him, wherefore pray turn, and entertain him.
Pray speak to him, Madam, and not stand trembling, as if you were like to fall.
My spirits is seized on by my bashful and innocent fears, in∣so much, as they have not strength to support my body without trem∣bling.
Sweet Madam, try not speak to him?
Honourable Sir? give me leave to tell you, that my bash∣fullness
doth smother the senses and reason in my brain, and chokes the words in my throat I should utter, but pray do not think it proceeds from crimes, but an imperfection of nature, which I have strove against, but cannot as yet rectify
Madam,
He hath writ here, that had his tongue liberty to speak, all that he could say, would be so far below, and inferior to what might be said in your praise, as he should not adventure to presume to speak.
I will presume to break my brain, but I will invent some ways to be rid of his company.
What makes thee look so sad, my boy?
To see you sit so melancholy.
Clear up thy countenance, for its not a deadly melancholy, though it is a troublesome one.
May I be so bold to ask the cause of it.
The cause is, a cruel Mistress.
Have you a Mistress, and can she be cruel?
O! Women are Tyrants, they daw us on to love, and then denies our suits.
Will not you think me rude, If I should question you?
No, for thy questions delights me more, than my Mistress de∣nials grieves me.
Then give me leave to ask you, whether your suit be just?
Just, to a Lovers desires.
What is your desire?
To lye with her.
After you have married her?
Marry her say thou, I had rather be banished from that Sex for ever, than marry one, and yet I love them well.
Why have you such an adversion to marriage, being lawful and honest.
Because I am afraid to be a Cuckold!
Do you think there is no chaste women?
Faith boy, I believe very few, and those that are men, knows not where to find them out, for all that are not married, professes cha∣steady, speaks soberly, and looks modestly, but when they are martyed, they are more wild than Bachalins, far worse than Satyrs, making their Husbands horns far greater than a Stags, having more branches sprouts thereon.
And doth he never cast those horns?
Yes, if he be a Widower, he casts his horns, only the marks remains, otherwise he bears them to his grave.
But put the case you did know a woman that was chaste; would not you marry her?
That is a question not to be resolved, for no man can be recall∣ved, whether a womam can be chaste or not.
Why do you sigh, my boy?
Because all women are false, or thought to be so, that wise men dares not trust them.
But they are fools, that will not try, and make use of them, if they can have them; wherefore I will go, and try my Mistress once again.
What a noise they make below, they will disturb my Husbands study; go and tell those of my Servants, that I will turn them away for their carelessness, as that they cannot place, set, or hold things sure, but let them fall to maké such a noise.
I shall.
It shall be my study how to order my house without noise, wherefore all my Servants shall be dumb, although not deaf, and I will take none, but such as have corns on their feet, that they may tread gently, and all my Houshold-vessel shall be of wood, for wood makes not such a noise when it chance to fall, or is hit against a wall, as metal doth, which rings like bells, when it is but touched, neither will I have Houshold-vessels of Earth, for earthen-pots, pans and the like; when they fall and break, sounds as if a stone∣wall fell.
On my soul Gentlemen, the boy is an honest boy, and no ways guilty of this you tax him for.
Pardon us, my Lord, for giving your Excellence notice that the States are jealous of him for a Spy, but we do not any ways accuse him.
Will the States examine him, say you?
So we hear, my Lord.
Well Gentlemen, pray leave me for this time, and I will take care the boy shall be forth-coming, whenever the State shall require him.
Your Lordships humble Servants —
A Spy, it cannot be, for he is neither covetous, nor malicious, re∣vengeful, nor irreligious, but I will try him.
Mrs. Reformer, pray tell me who that handsome Gentleman is, which follows my Lady about?
He is one that is Noble, and Rich, and is in love with my Lady.
Truly it is the strangest way of wooing, that ever was, for my Lady goes blushing out of one room into another, and he follows her at the heels: In my conscience my Lady is ashamed to sit down, or to bid him leave her company, and surely they must needs be both very weary of walking, but sure he will leave her, when it is time to go to bed.
It is to be hoped he will.
Madam, you will tire your self and the Gentleman, with walking about your house, wherefore pray sit down.
What! To have him gaze upon my face.
Why, your face is a handsome face, and the owner of it is ho∣nest, wherefore you need not be ashamed, but pray rest your self.—
Pray persuade him to leave me, and then I will.
Sir, my Lady entreats you to leave her to her self.
He writes he cannot leave you, for if his body should depart, his soul will remain still with you.
That will not put me out of countenance, because I shall not be sensible of its presence, wherefore I am content he should leave his soul, so that he will take his body away.
He writes, that if you will give him leave once a day to see you, that he will depart, and that he will not disturb your thoughts, he will only wait upon your person for the time he lives, he cannot keep himself long from you.
But I would be alone.
But if he will follow you, you must endure that with patience, you cannot avoid.
You see he is so civil, as he is unwilling to displease you.
Rather than I will be troubled thus; I will go to some other parts of the World.
In my conscience, Madam, he will follow you, wheresoever you go.
But I will have him shut out of my house.
Then he will lye at your gates, and so all the Town will take no∣tice of it.
Why so, they will howsoever, by his often visits.
But not so public.
Affectionate. Thou must carry a Letter from me, to my Mistress.
You will not marry her, you say.
No.
Then pardon me, my Lord, for though I would assist your honest love by any service I can do, yet I shall never be so base an Instrument, as to produce a crime.
Come, come, thou shalt carry it, and I will give thee 500. pounds for thy service.
Excuse me, my Lord.
I will give thee a thousand pounds.
I shall not take it, my Lord.
I will give thee five thousand, nay ten thousand pounds.
I am not covetous, my Lord.
I will make thee Master of my whole Estate, for without the assistance, I cannot enjoy my Mistress, by reason she will trust none with our Loves, but thee.
Could you make me Master of the whole World, it could not tempt me to do an action base, for though I am poor, I am honest, and so honest, as I cannot be corrupted, or bribed there-from.
You said you loved me?
Heaven knows I do above my life, and would do you any ser∣vice that honour did allow of.
You are more scrupulous than wise.
There is an old saying, my Lord, that to be wise, is to be honest.
Where is your Lady?
In her Chamber, Sir.
Pray her to come to me?
Yes Sir.
Lord, Lord! What a creature my Master is become; since he fell into his musing again, he looks like a melancholy Ghost, that walks in the shades of Moon-shine, or if there be no Ghost, such as we fancy, just such a one seems her, when a week since, he was as fine a Gentleman as one should see amongst a thousand.
That was because he kissed you, Nan.
Faith it was but a dull clownish part, to meet a Maid that is not ill-favoured, and not make much of her, who perchance have watched to meet him, for which he might have clapped her on the cheek, or have chucked her under the chin, or have kissed her, but to do or say nothing, but bid me call my Lady, was such a churlish part? Besides, it seemed neither manly, gallantly, nor civilly.
But it showed him temperate and wise, not minding such frivilous and troublesome creatures as women are.
Prithee, it shows him to be a miserable, proud, dull fool.
Peace, some body will hear you, and then you will be turned away.
I care not, for it they will not turn me away, I will turn my self away, and seek another service, for I hate to live in the house with a Stoic.
By your face, Sir, there seems a trouble in your mind, and I am restless until I know your griefs.
It is a secret I dare not trust the air with!
I shall be more secret than the air, for the air is apt to di∣vulge by retorting Ecohes back, but I shall be as silent as the Grave.
But you may be tortured to confess the truth.
But I will not confess the truth, if the confession may any ways hurt, or disadvantage you; for though I will not belie truth by speaking falsely, yet I will conceal a truth, rather than betray a friend. Especially, my Lord and Master: But howsoever, since your trouble is of such concern, I shall not with to know it, for though I dare trust my self, yet perchance you dare not trust me, but if my honest fidelity can serve you any ways, you may employ it, and if it be to keep a secret, all the torment that nature hath made, or art invented, shall never draw it from me.
Then let me tell thee, that to conceal it, would damn thy soul.
Heaven bless me! But sure, my Lord, you cannot be guilty of such sins, that those that doth but barely hear, or know them, shall be damned.
But to conceal them, is to be an Actor.
For Heaven sake then keep them close from me, if either they be base or wicked, for though love prompt me to inquire, hoping to give you ease in bearing part of the burden, yet Heaven knows, I thought my love so honourable placed on such a worthy person, and guiltless soul, as I might love and serve without a scandal, or a deadly sin.
Come, you shall know it.
I'll rather stop my ears with death.
Go, thou art a false boy.
How false a boy howsoever you think me, I have an honest soul and heart that is ready to serve you in any honest way, but since I am de∣ceived, and cozened into love by false reports, finding the best of man-kind basely wicked, and all the World so bad, that praise nothing good, and strives to poison virtue, I will inancor my self, and live on Antidotes of prayers, for fear of the infection.
And I will not you pray for me?
I cannot chose, my Lord, for gratitude enforces me; First, because I have loved you, next, because I have served you; and give me leave to kiss your hand, and then there drop some tears at my departure.
Rise, you must not go away until you have cleared your self from being a spy.
I fear no accusations,

NOble Spectators, you have spent this day;
Not only for to see, but judge our Play:
Our Authors says, she thinks her Play is good,
If that her Play be rightly understood;
If not, it is none of her fault, for she writ
The Acts, the Scenes, the Language and the Wit;
Wherefore she says, that she is not your Debtor,
But you are hers, until you write a better;
Of even terms to be she understands
Impossible, except you clap your hands.
This dumb Lower is the most diligent'st servant that ever was, and methinks my Lady is somewhat more confi∣dent than she was; for she will sit and read whilst he sits by.
Doth she read to him?
No, she reads to herself.
There comes abundance of Gallants to visit my Lady every day, and they have all one answer, that is, she is not willing to receive visits, and they all go civilly away, unless Sir Humphrey Bold and he rails whore∣bly.
I have received from several Gentlemen, above 20. Letters a day, and as fast as they come, she makes me burn them.
But she reads them first.
No, I read them to her.
And doth she answer all those Letters?
She never answered one in her life, and I dare swear, she never will.
Madam!—
Affectionate. Hast thou forgiven me my fault of doubting of thy virtue, so much as to put it to a Trial.
My Noble Lord, have you forgiven my facility and wavering, faith that could so easily, and in so short a time believe you could be wicked, although you did accuse your self.
Nay Affectionate, I did not accuse my self, though I did try thee.
Then I have committed a treble fault through my mistake, which requires a treble forgiveness.
Thou art so virtuous, thou can not commit a fault, and therefore needs no forgiveness.
Madam, You have been pleased to profess a friendship to me, and I shall desire you will do a friendly part for me.
Any thing that lies in my power, good Sir Humphrey Bold.
Then pray, Madam, speak to the Lady Bashful in my behalf, that I may be her Husband.
I will Sir Humphrey, but she is bashful, yet I was there Ye∣sterday, and she entertained me indifferently well, but seemed to be wonderful coy; but howsoever I will do my poor endeavour, Sir Humphrey.
Pray do, Madam.
My Affectionate, Why walks thou so melancholy?
The cause is not that I lye under an aspersion, by reason I lye not under a crime; But truly, my Lord, I am troubled that I am threatened to be tormented, for I would not willingly endure pain, though I could will∣lingly receive death; but as for the aspersions, I am no ways concerned; for I make no question, but my honest life, my just actions, and the truth of my words, will so clear me at the last, as I shall appear as innocent to the World, as Angels doth in Heaven.
Comfort your self, for I will rather suffer death, than you shall suffer pain.
Heaven defend you, my Lord, whatsoever I suffer,
Pray Mistress Reformer, be Sir Humphrey Bolt's friend to thy Lady, and I protest to thee, he shall be thy friend, as long as he and you live, and I do not see any reason your Lady should refuse him; for he is both as proper and stout a man, as any is living this day in the Land.
Indeed Madam, I dare not mention it to my Lady, for she is so adverse against marriage, as she takes those for her enemies as doth but men∣tion it.
Then surely she is not a woman, for there is none of the of∣seminate Sex, but takes it for a disgrace to live an old maid, and rather than dye one, they will marry any man that will have them; and the very fear of not marrying, is so terrible to them, as whilst they are so young, as they are not fit to make wives, they will miserably cast away themselves to the first that makes a proffer, although they be poor, base or mean, rather than venture to try out their fortunes.
But my Lady is not of that humour.
Come, come, I know thou can persuade thy Lady if thou would, and if you will, Sir Humphrey Bold will give thee 500 l. to buy thee a Husband, for thou hast lived too long a maid I faith.
I am not a maid, Madam, I am a widow.
What, a musty widow!
I know not whether I am musty, but I am a widow.
Let me tell thee, that it is as great a disgrace to live a wi∣dow, as an old maid; wherefore take thee 500 l. to get thee a second Hus∣band.
Truly I would not sell my Lady for all the World, much less, for 500 l. neither would I marry again, if I were young, and might have my choice.
Lord bless me, and send me out of this house, least it should infect me; for let me tell thee, were my Husband dead to morrow, I would marry the day after his Funeral, if I could get any man to marry me, and so I would serve 20. Husbands one after another.
Your best way were to have 20. Husbands at one time, so that your Ladyship might not be a day without.
O fie! If women might have twenty Husbands, they would have no room for courtly Servants; but prithee help Sir Humphrey Bold, and take his offer, and let me speak with the Lady my self.
That your Ladyship cannot at this time, for my Lady is not well.
Then pray remember my most humble service, and tell her, I will come to morrow, and if she be sick, I will talk her well.
Dead you would talk her, for thou hast an endless tongue; Oh! what man is so miserable that is her Husband.
It is reported that our Generals Page hath behaved him∣self so handsomely, spoke so wittily, defended his cause so prudently, declared his innocence so clearly, and carried his business so wisely, as the Ve∣netian States have not only quited him freely, but doth applaud him wonder∣fully, extols him highly, and offers him any satisfaction for the injury and disgrace that hath been done him; but he only desires, that the man that had accused him, which man, was one of the Generals men, should be pardoned, and not punished.
I hope our General is well pleased, that his beloved boy is not only cleared, but applauded.
O! He doth nothing but embrace him, and kiss him, as if he were his only son, yet he did gently chide him that he asked pardon for his accusers; for said he, if all false accusers should be pardoned, no honest man would escape free form censure.
But I hear the States have given order to our General to meet the Turks again, for it is reported by intelligences that they have re∣cruited into a numerous body.
Faith I think the Turks are like the tale of the Giant, that when his head was cut off there rise two in the place.
I think they are like the vegetable that is named three∣fold, the more it is cut the faster it grows.
I would the Devil had them for me.
We do what we can to send them to Hell; but whether they will quit thee, I cannot tell.
My Affectionate I wonder you could suffer an accusati∣on so patiently knowing you were accused falsely.
The clearness of my innocence needed not the fury of a vio∣lent passion to defend it, neither could passion have rectified an injury.
Tic true, yet passion is apt to rise in defence of innocen∣cy, and honour.
And many times passion (my Lord) destroy; the life in striving to maintain the truth, and defend the innocent; but I find a passio∣nate sorrow that your Lordship must go to endanger your life in the wars again.
The wars is pastime to me, for I hate idleness, and no employment pleases me better than fighting, so it be in a good cause, but you shall stay.
Why my Lord, are you weary of my service?
Know I am careful of thy safety, thy rest and peace, for should thou not come near danger, yet the very tragical aspect will terrify thee to death, thou art of so tender a nature, so soft and sweet a dispo∣sition.
Truly my Lord, if you leave me behind you, the very fear of your life will kill me, where if your Lordyship will let me go, love will give me courage.
Then let me tell you, you must not go, for I have adopted you my Son, and I have settled all my Estate upon thee, where, if I am killed, you shall be my Heir, for I had rather virtue should inherit my Estate than birth, yet I charge thee take my Name upon thee, as well as my Estate unto thee.
My noble Lord, I should be prouder to bear your name, than to be Master of the whole World, but I shall never be so base to keep my self in safety, in hope of your Estate, wherefore must entreat your leave to go with you.
I will not give you leave, but command you to the contrary, which is to stay.
I cannot obey you in this, for love will force me to run after you.
I will have you lashed, if you offer to go.
Stripes cannot stay me!
I will have you tied, and kept by force.
By Heaven, my Lord, i'll tear my flesh, and break my bones to get lose, and if I have not legs to run, i'll creep thorough the Earth like worms, for though I shall move but slowly, yet it will be a satisfaction to my soul, that I am travelling after you,
Affectionate, You anger me very much.
Indeed my Lord, you grieve me more than I can anger you.
What, do you cry! and yet desire to be a soldier?
A valiant heart, my Lord, may have a weeping eye to keep it company.
If no persuasion can stay you, you must go along with me.
Faith Lady Bashful, we will have you abroad to Balls and public meetings, to learn you a confident behaviour, and a bold speech; Fie! You must not be bashful.
Our visiting her sometimes, hath made her so, as she is not altogether so bashful as she was.
Surely Sir Serious Dumb is a domestic servant here, he stands and waits as one.
If she will entertain such servants as he, she is not so modest as she appears. Lady, perchance if I had come privately alone, I had been entertained with more freedom, and not have had my suit denied, and my person neglected with scorn, and he received with respect.
For Heaven sake! fight not here, to affright me with your quarrels.
I will have his heart-bloud.
Good Sir Serious Dumb, and Sir Humphrey Bold, leave off fighting.
Pray Sir Humphrey Bold, give me your sword, that I may be sure you will not fight.
What, yield my sword up! I will dye first.
All speak at one time, who is killed, who is killed.
Good Ladies, hold Sir Humphrey Bold, and I will try to per∣swade Sir Serious Dumb.
What, you shall not stir, I am sure you will not oppose us women.
Noble Sir, to give me an assurance you will not fight, give me your sword.
What, are you not ashamed to assault an unarmed man.
Let the sword alone, for it is my prize; and by Heaven, if you touch it, I will run you thorough with this sword in my hand.
Hell take me, but I will be revenged: Lady, I hope you will give me my sword again.
Never to fight against a woman, but my victorious spoils, I will deliver to this gallant Gentleman, who delivered up his life and honour into my hand, when he gave me his sword, and I endangered the loss of both by taking it, for which my gratitude hath nothing to return him but my self and fortunes, if he please to accept of that and me.
Sir, I wish my person were more beautiful than it is, for your sake, and my fortune greater, with more certainty of continuance, as neither being subject to time or accident, but this certainly I will promise you, which is, my chaste and honest life; Now Sir, pray take these two swords, this was yours, fear gave me confidence, this I won, love gave me courage.
I will be revenged.
Affectionate, I hear thou hast bought Arms, I am sure thou can not fight.
I am sure I will do my endeavour, my Lord.
Why, the very weight of thy Arms will sink thee down.
O no, my Lord; my desire shall beat them up.
Alas, thou halt no strength to fight?
What strength my active body wants, my vigorous spirits shall make good.
Prithee, my boy, do not adventure thy self, but stay in my Tent.
That would be a shame for me, and a dishonour to you, since you have adopted me your son, wherefore the World shall never say, you have bestowed your favour and your love upon a coward.
I well perceive I have adopted a very wilful boy?
Indeed, my Lord, I have no will, but what doth follow you.
The time I vowed to silence is expired, and though my thoughts not gloriously attired with Eloquence, for Rhetoric I have none, yet civil words, sit for to wait upon a modest Lady, and to entertain an honest mind with words of truth, though plain? For it is not Rhetoric makes a happy life, but sweet society, that's void of strife.
Sir Rhetoric is rather for sound than sense, for words than reason.
Yet my sweet Mistress, I wish my voice were tuned to your ear, and every word set as a pleasing note to make such music as might delight your mind.
Your words slow thorough my ears, as smooth, clear, pure water from the spring of Hellicon, which doth not only refresh, but enrich my dull insipid brain.
The Turks never received such a blow, as they have this time?
A pox of them, they have made us sweat?
Why Captain, sweating will cure the Pox, and though you curse the Turks, yet it is we that live in Italy, that is diseased with them.
The truth is, we lost more health in the Venetian service, than we gain wealth.
Nay faith Captain, we do not only lose our health, but wast our wealth, for what booties we get from the Turks, the Courtesans gets from us.
For that cause now I have gotten a good booty, I will return into mine own Country, and buy a—
A what Captain?
An Office in civil Government.
But you will never be civil in your Office.
That needs not to be, for though all Magisterial Offices bears a civil Authority, yet the Officers and Magistrates therein, are more cruel and ravenons than common soldiers.
Verily Captain, I think common Soldiers are more merciful and just than they.
Verily Corporal, I think you will become a Puritan Preacher.
Why should you think so, Captain.
First, because you have got the Pox, and that will make you Preach in their tone, which is, to speak thorough the nose; the next is, you have left the ranting Oaths that Soldier's use to swear, and use their phrases; as verily my beloved brethren, which brethrens souls, they care not for, nor thinks thereof, for though they speak to the brethren, they Preach to the si∣sters, which edifies wonderfully by their Doctrine, and they gain and receive as wonderful from their female Hocks, for those Puritan Preachers have more Tithes out of the Marriage-bed, than from the Parish-stock.
If it be so beneficial, Captain, I had rather be a Puritan Preacher, than an Atheistical States-man.
Faith Corporal, I think there is not much Religion in either, but if there be, it lies in the States-man, for he keeps Peace, the other makes War.
If they make wars; they are our friends, for we live by the spoils of our enemies.
It is true, when as we get a victory, or else our enemies lives on the spoil of us, for though we have no goods to lose, yet we venture our lives, neither do we live on the spoil of our enemies, but only in foreign wars, for in civil wars we live by the spoil of our Friends, and the ruining of our Country.
Then we are only obliged to Preachers for civil wars.
Faith Corporal, we are obliged to them for both; for as their fa∣etious Doctrine causes a Rebellion by railing on the Governors and Govern∣mints, so their flattering Sermons sets a Prince on fire, who burns in hot am∣bition to conquer all the World.
These latter Preachers you mention, Captain, are not Puritan Preachers, but Royal Preachers.
You are right Corporal, for they are divided in two parts, although their Doctrine meets at one end, which is in war.
Captain, you have discovered so fully of Preachers, that if you will give me leave, I will preach to our Company.
Out you rogue, will you raise a war amongst our selves, causing a mutiny to cut one another throats?
Why Captain, it is the fashion and practice for Soldiers to Preach now adays.
That is amongst the Rebel party to keep up their faction, and to strengthen the flank thereof, but amongst the Royal party, the Preaching Mi∣nisters turn fighting Soldiers, encouraging with their good example, as by their valiant onsets, and not the Soldiers Preaching Ministers.
Why Captain, the Royal party needs no encouragement, the ju∣stice of their cause is sufficient.
You say right, they want not courage to fight, but they want con∣science to plunder; Besides, the Royal party is apt to give quarter, which should not be, for Soldiers should destroy all they take in Civil-wars, by reason there is no gain to be made of their Prisoners, as by the way of Ran∣soms, but if we stay from our Company, our General will preach such a Ser∣mon, as may put us into despair of his favour, and endanger our lives at the Council of war.
I think our Generals new made son is a spirit; for when the General was surrounded with the Turks, this adopted Son of his flew about like lightening, and made such a massacre of the Turks, as they lay as thick upon the ground, as if they had been mushromes.
Certainly the General had been taken Prisoner, if his Son had not rescued him, for the General had adventured too far into the enemies body.
It is strange, and doth amaze me with wonder, to think how such a Willow-twig could bore so many mortal holes in such strong timbered bodies as the Turks.
By him one would believe miracles were not ceased.
Well, for my part I will ask pardon of my General for condemning him privately in my thoughts, for I did think him the most fond, (I will not say what) for adopting a poor Beggar-boy for his son, and settled all his Estate, which is, a very great one upon him.
The truth is, he is a very gallant youth, and if he lives and continues in the wars, he will prove a most excellent Soldier.
Certainly he sprung from a Noble Stock, either by his Fa∣theirs side, or by his Mothers.
By his behaviour he seems Nobly born from both.
And by his poverty, Nobly born from neither.
Mean persons may have wealth, and Noble births be Beggars.
Gentlemen, I beseech you, use not this ceremony to me, it belongs only to my Lord General.
Your merits and gallant actions deserves it from us; Besides, it is your due, as being the Generals adopted Son.
My Lords favour may place a value on me, though I am poor in worth, and no ways deserves this respect.
Faith Sir, had it not been for you, we had lost the bat∣tel.
Alas, my weak arm could never make a conquest, although my will was good, and my desire strong to do a service.
Sir, the service was great, when you rescued our General, for when a General is taken or killed, the Armies are put to rout, for then the common Soldiers runs away, never stays to fight it out.
I beseech you Gentlemen, take not the honour from my Lord to give it me, for he was his own defence, and ruin to his enemies; for his valiant spirits shot thorouh his eyes, and struck them dead, thus his own cou∣rage was his own safety, and the Venetians victory.
Noble Sir, the Venetian-States hath made you Lieutenant Ge∣neral of the whole Army, and one of the Council of War, where they de∣sire your presence.
The honours they have given me, is beyond my manage∣meant.
Good your Honour, speak in the behalf of my Petition.
And mine.
And mine.
Good women, I cannot do you service, for if your Petitions are just, my Lord the General will grant your request, and if they be unjust, he will not be unjust in granting them for my intrearie, nor will I entreat there∣fore.
If it please your Honour, we implore Mercy, not Justice.
Where Justice and Wisdom will give leave for Mercy, I am sure my Lord will grant it, otherwise, what you call mercy, will prove cruelty, and cause ruin and destruction.
We beseech your Honour then, but to deliver our Petitious.
For what are they?
For the lives of our Husbands.
Are they to be executed?
They are condemned, and to be hanged to morrow, unless the Ge∣neral gives them pardons.
What are their crimes?
My Husband is to be hanged for plundering a few old rotten Houshold-goods.
Give me your Petition, necessity might enforce him.
My Husband is to be hanged for disobeying his Captain when he was drunk.
When which was drunk? your Husband or his Captain?
My Husband.
Disobedience ought to be severely punished, yet because his reason was drowned in his drink, and his understanding smothered with the vapour thereof, whereby he knew not what he did, I will deliver your Pe∣tition.
And what is yours?
My Husband is to be hanged for ravishing a Virgin.
I will never deliver a Petition for those that are Violators of Virginity, I will sooner act the Hang-mans part my self to strangle him.
And what is your Husbands crime?
My Husband is to be hanged for murder.
O horrid! They that murder, ought to have no mercy given to them, since they could give no mercy to others.
Good your Honour.
Nay, never press me, for I will never deliver your Petition.
Noble Sir, I come to entreat you to be my friend, to speak to the General in my behalf, that I may remain in my place, for I am to be ca∣shared.
For what?
For a small fault, Sir, for when the battle was begun, I had such a cholick took me in the stomach, as I was forced to go aside, and untruss a point.
It had been more for your honour, Captain, to had let nature discharge it self in your breeches. And what, are you cashiered Captain?
Marry, for my good service, for when the battle begun, my Soldiers run away, and I run after to call them back, they run, and I rid so long, as we were gotten ten miles from the Army, but I could not get them, until such time as the battle was won.
It had been more honour for you to have fought single alone without your Soldiers, than to have followed your Soldiers, although to make them stay, and you would have done more service with your standing still than your running; and what, are you to be cashiered?
Why Sir, my company wanted Powder, and I went to fetch or give order; for some to be brought, and before I returned to my Comp∣ny, the battle was won.
It had been more for your honour and good service, to have stayed and encouraged your Soldiers by your example with sighting with your sword, for the sword makes a greater execution than the shot; but since they were not wilful, nor malicious faults, I shall do you what service I can, for fear sometimes may seize the valiantest man. And what were your faults Colonel?
Mine was for betraying a Fort.
O base! He that betrays a Fort, ventures to betray a Kingdom, which is millions of degrees worse than to betray a life, or a particular friend; for those that betrays a Kingdom, betrays numbers of lifes, and those that be∣trays their native Country, betrays that which gave them nourishing strength, and you have had great mercy in giving you your life, although you lose your place. And what was your fault?
Mine was for neglecting the Watch.
That is as bad as to give leave for the enemy to surprise, only the one betrays through carelessness, the other through covetousness. And what was your fault Colonel?
Mine was for disobeying the Generals Orders.
Let me tell you Colonel, he that will not obey, is not fit to command; and those that commits careless, stubborn, malicious and wicked crimes; I will never deliver their Petition, nor speak in their behalf.
Good your Honour save me from punishment.
What are you to be punished for?
I am to be punished, because I said my Captain was a coward.
What reason had you to say so?
The reason was, because he sung and whistled when he went to fight.
That might be to show his courage.
O no, it was to hide his fear.
But you ought not to have called your Captain coward, had he been so; for the faults of Superiors are to be winked at, and obscured; and not to be divulged: Besides, yours was but a supposition, unless he ran away.
No Sir, he fought.
Then you were too blame for judging so.
I confess it, Sir, wherefore pray speak for me.
Indeed I cannot, for to call a man coward, is to kill, at least to wound his reputation, which is far worse, that if you had killed the life of his body; by how much honour is to be preferred before life; but if you can make your peace with your Captain by asking his pardon; I will then speak to the General, that the sentence for your punishment may be taken off, wherefore let me advise you to go to your Captain, and in the most humblest and sorrowfulst manner ask forgiveness of him.
I shall, and it please your Honour.
HOw happy is a private life to me;
Wherein my thoughts ran easily and free;
And not disturbed with vanities and joys,
On which the senses gazes, as young boys
On watery bubbles in the air blown,
Which when they break, doth vanish and are gone.
I doubt I disturb your Poetry?
No wife, you rather give life and fire to my muse, being chaste, fair and virtuous, which are the chief themes for Poets fancies to work on.
But that wife that is despised by her Husband, and not lo∣ved, is dejected in her own thoughts, and her mind is so disquieted, as it masks her beauty, and veils, and obscures her virtues.
The truth is, wife, that if my affections to you, had not been firmly settled; your indiscretion and effeminate follies had ruined it, but my love is so true, as you have no cause to be jealous; but I confess you made me sad, to think that your humour could not sympathize with mine, as to walk in the same course of life as I did, but you were ignorant and would not believe me, until you had found experience by practice, by which pra∣ctice you have found my words to be true, do you not?
Yes, so true, as I shall never doubt them more; But pray Husband, tell me what discourse you had with the Ladies, when you went abroad with them?
Why, they railed against good Husbands, called them Uxorious Fools, Clowns, Blocks, Stocks, and that they were only fit to be made Cuckolds through their confident fondness, and that kind Husbands ap∣peared like simple Asses; I answered, that those Husbands that were Cuc∣kolds, appeared not only like silly Asses, but base Cowards, that would suffer their wives to be courted, and themselves dishonoured when they ought to destroy their wives Gallants, if visibly known, and to part from their wives, at least to mancor them, and not only for being self, but for the suspicion caused by their indiscretions; otherwise said I, a kind Husband shows himself a Gal∣lant, Noble, Generous, Just, Wise man, and contrary, he is a base man, that will strive to disgrace himself, by disgracing his wife with neglects and disre∣spects; and a coward, to tyrannize only over the weak, tender, and helpless Sex; for women being tender, shiftless, and timorous creatures by nature, is the cause they join themselves by chaste Wedlock to us men for their safety, protection, honour and livelihood, and when a man takes a woman to his wife, he is an unworthy and treacherous person, if he betrays her to scorns, or yields her to scoffs, or leaves her to poverty; and he is a base man that makes
his wife sigh and weep with unkindness either by words or actions, where∣fore said I, it is wisdom for men to respect their wives with a civil behaviour, and sober regard, and it is heroic to defend, protect and guard their lives and virtues, to be constant to their vows, promises and protestations, and it is ge∣nerous to cherish their health, to attend them in their sickness, to comply with their harmless humours, to entertain their discourses, to accompany their persons, to yield to their lawful desires, and to commend their good graces, and that man which is a Husband, and doth not do thus, is worthy to be shamed, and not to be kept company with, which is not called an Uxorious Husband; for said I, an Uxorious Husband I understand to be, a honest, care∣full and wise Husband.
And what said they, after you said this?
They laughed and said, my flowery Rhetoric was strewed upon a dirty ground; I answered, it was not dirty where I lived, for my wife was beautiful, chaste and cleanly, and I wished every man the like, and after they perceived that neither the railing, nor laughing at good Husbands could not temper me for their palats, they began to play and sport with one another, and sung wanton songs, and when all their baits failed, they quarreled with me, and said I was uncivil, and that I did not entertain them well, and that I was not good Company, having not aconversable wit, nor a gentle beha∣viour, and that I was not a gallant Cavalier, and a world of those reproaches and idle discourses, as it would tire me to repeat it, and you to hear it.
Pray resolve me one question more, what was it you said to the Lady Amorous, when she threatened to tell me?
I only said nature was unkind to our Sex, in making the beautiful females cruel.
Was that all, I thought you had pleaded as a courtly Su∣tor for loves favours.
No indeed, but let me tell you, and so inform you, wife, that those humoured women, take as great a pleasure to make wives jealous of their Husbands, and Husbands jealous of their wives, and to separate their affections, and to make a disorder in their Families, as to plot and de∣sign to entice men to court them, &amp; Cuckold their Husband, also let me tell you, that much company, and continual resort, brings great inconveniences for its apt to corrupt the mind, and make the thoughts wild, the behaviour bold, the words vain, the discourse either flattering, rude or tedious, their actions extra∣vagant, their persons cheap, being commonly occompanyed, or their comp∣ny common. Besides, much variety of Company, creates amorous luxu∣rye, vanity, prodigality, jealousy, envy, malice, slander, envy, treachery, quar∣tells, revenge and many other evils, as laying plots to ensnare the Honourable, to accuse the Innocent, to deceive the Honest, to corrupt the Chaste, to deboyst the Temperate, to pick the purse of the Rich, to enslave the poor, to pull down lawful Authority, and to break just Laws; but when a man lives to himself within his own Family, and without recourse, after a solitary manner, he lives free, without control, not troubled with company, but entertains himself with himself, which makes the soul wise, the mind sober, the thoughts endue∣strious, the understanding learned, the heart honest, the senses quiet, the appe∣tites temperate, the body healthful, the actions just and prudent, the behavi∣our civil and sober; He governs orderly, eats peaceably, sleeps quietly, lives contentedly, and most commonly, plentifully and pleasantly, ruling and go∣verning
his little Family to his own humour, wherein he commands with love, and is obeyed with duty, and who that is wise, and is not mad; would quit this heavenly life to live in hellish Societies, and what can an honest Husband and wife desire more, than love, peace and plenty, and when they have this, and is not content, it is a sign they stand upon a Quagmire, or rotten Founda∣tion, that will never hold or endure, that is, they are neither grounded on ho∣nasty, nor supported with honour.
Well Husband, I will not interupt your studies any lone∣ger, but as you study Philosophy, Wisdom and Invention, so I will study obe∣audience, discretion and Houswifery.
Affectionate, Were you never bred to the Discipline of War?
Never, my Lord, but what I have been since I came to you.
Why, thou did speak at the Council of War, as if thou had been an old experienced soldier, having had the practice of forty years, which did so astonish the grave Senators and old Soldiers, that they grew dumb, and for a while did only gaze on thee.
Indeed, my Lord, my young years, and your grave Counsel did not suit together.
But let me tell thee, my boy, thy rational and wise spy∣ches, and that grave counsels was not mis-match'd.
Pray Heaven I may prove so, as your favours, and your love may not be thought misplaced.
My Love thinks thee worthy of more than I can give thee, had I more power than Caesar had.
I hear that the Duke of Venice is so taken with our Ge∣nerals adopted Son, as he will adopt him his Son.
Hay-day! I have heard that a Father hath had many Sons, but never that one Son hath had so many Fathers; but contrary, many Sons wants fathering.
It is true, some Sons hath the misfortune not to be owned, but let me tell you Lieutenant, there be few children that hath not many such Fathers; as one begets a child, a second owns the child, a third keeps the child, which inherits as the right Heir; and if a fourth will adopt the child; a fifth, or more may do the like, if they please.
So amongst all his Fathers, the right Father is lost.
Faith, the right Father of any child is seldom known, by reason that women takes as much delight in deceiving the World, and dissem∣bling with particular men, as in the cuckolding their Husbands.
The truth is, every several Lover cuckolds one another.
Perchance that is the reason that women strives to have so many Lovers; for women takes pleasure to make Cuckolds.
And Cuckolds to own children.
Noble Sir, the great Duke of Venice hath sent us to let you know he hath adopted you his Son, and desires your com∣pany.
Pray return the great Duke thanks, and tell him those favours are too great for such a one as I; but if he could, and would adopt me, as Augustus Caesar did Tiberius, and make me master of the whole World; by Heaven I would refuse it, and rather chose to live in a poor Cottage, with my most Noble Lord.
But you must not deny him; Besides, he will have you.
I will dye first, and rather chose to bury my self in my own tears, than build a Throne with ingratitude.
But it is ungrateful to deny the Duke.
O no, but I should be the ingrate of ingratitude, should I leave my Noble Lord, who from a low despised poor mean degree, advanced me to Respect and Dignity:
Whose favours I will keep close in my heart,
And from his person I will never part.
For though I dye, my soul will still attend,
And wait upon him, as his faithful friend.
Noble Sir, will not you send the Duke an answer?
Have not I answered? Then pray present my thanks in the most humblest manner to the great Duke, and tell him he may force the pre∣sense of my person, but if he doth, it will be but as a dead carcase without a living soul; for tell him, when I am from my Lord,
I withering vade, as flowers from Sun sight;
His presence is to me, as Heavens light.
It is strange that such an honour cannot persuade a boy!
That proves him a boy, for if he had been at mans estate, he would not have refused it, but have been ambitious of it, and proud to re∣ceive it.
Indeed youth is foolish, and knows not how to chose.
When he comes to be a man, he will repent the folly of his youth.
Pray Madam, let me persuade you, not to cast your self away, to marry a dumb man; for by my troth, all those that are dumb, are mere fools; for who can be witty or wise that cannot speak, or will not speak, which is as bad.
Why Madam? wisdom nor wit, doth noth not live not lye in words, for prudence, fortitude and temperance, expresses wisdom and ca∣pacity; ingenuity and fancy expresses wit, and not words.
But let me advise you to chose Sir Humphrey Bold, he is worth a thousand of Sir Serious Dumb; besides, he is a more learned man by half, and speaks several Languages.
Perchance so, and yet not so wise; for Parrots will learn Languages, and yet not know how to be wise, nor what wisdom is, which is to have a found judgement, a clear understanding, and a prudent forecast.
Faith all the World will condemn you to have no forecast, if you marry Sir Serious Dumb.
Let them speak their worst, I care not, as not fearing their censures.
You were fearful and bashful.
It is true, but now am grown so confident with honest love, I care not if all the World did know of it; nay, I wish it were published to all ears.
Nay, you must not go, until you have granted my suit in the behalf of Sir Humphrey Bold.
Pray let me go, for I hate him more, than Heaven hates Hell.
Nay, then I will leave you.
Why weepest thou Affectionate?
Alas, my Lord, I am in such a passion, as I shall dye, un∣less it flows forth thorough mine eyes, and runs from off my tongue.
For like as vapours from the Earth doth rise,
And gather into clouds beneath the skies;
Contracts to water, swelling like moist veins,
When over-fill'd, falls down in showering rains:
So thoughts, which from a grieved mind are sent,
Arises in a vaporous discontent.
Contracts to melancholy, which heavy lies
Until it melts, and runs forth through the eyes;
Unless the Sun of comfort, dry doth drink
Those watery tears that lies at the eyes brink;
Or that the rays of joy, which streams bright out
With active heat disperses them about.
Faith Affectionate, I am no good Poet, but thy passion moves so sweetly in numbers and stops, so just with rhymes, as I cannot but an∣swer thee,
Like as the Sun beauty streams rays about,
A smiling countenance like day breaks out:
And though a frown obscures sweet beauties sight,
Yet beauties beams makes cloudy frowns more bright:
But melancholy beauty doth appear
As pleasing shades, or Summers evenings clear.
So doth thine Affectionate, but prithee do not wast thy breath into sighs, nor distill thy life into tears.
I wish I might here breath my last, and close my eyes for ever.
I perceive Affectionate, you take it unkindly I did per∣swade you to take the Dukes offer; But if you think I did it out of any other design than a true affection to you; By Heaven, you do me wrong by false in∣terpretation.
If you, my Lord, did love but half so well as I, you would ra∣there chose to dye, than part with me.
I love thee beyond my own interest or delight, for what is best for thee, I account as the greatest blessing, should it bring me any other ways a curse.
Then let me still live with you, for that is best for me.
Here I do vow to Heaven, to do my endeavour with my life to keep thee with me, or to be always where thou art.
O! what a weight you have taken from my soul, wherein my thoughts like wer-winged-birds sate heavy; my senses like as blinking Lamps which vaporous damps of grief had near put out.
Let me tell thee Affectionate, I have travelled far, obser∣ved much, and have had divers encounters, but I never met such virtue, found such truth, nor encountered such an affection as thine.
And thus I do embrace thee, and do wish our souls may twine,
As our each bodies thus together join.
Dear Mistress, do not you repent your favours, and wish your promise were never made; doth not your affection vade?
No, it cannot, for never was any love placed upon a Nobler soul than my love is, which is on yours, insomuch, as I do glory in my af∣fection, and grow self-conceited of its judgement.
And will you be constant?
Let not your humble thoughts raise a doubt of jealousy; for I am fixed, as time is to eternity.
Then I thank nature for your Creation, honour for your Breeding, and heaven for your Virtue, and fortune that hath given you to me, for I can own nothing of that worth that could deserve you.
I cannot condemn jealousy, because it proceeds from pure love, and love melts into kinds on a constant heart, but flames like Oil on a false one, which sets the whole life on fire.
But now I cannot doubt your love nor constancies, since you have promised your heart to me; for true Lovers are like the light and the Sun, inseparable.
Come fellow-souldiers, are you ready to march?
Whether?
Into our own native Country, for our General is sent sol home.
Except there be wars in our own Country, we cannot go with him.
I know not whether there be wars or peace, but he obeys, for he is preparing for his journey.
Who shall be General when he is gone?
I know not, but I hear the States offers to make our young Lieutenant-General, General, but he refuses it.
Would they would make me General?
If thou were General, thou would put all method out of order.
Faith Gentlemen, I would lead you most prudently, and give you leave to plunder most unanimously.
And we would fight courageously, to keep what we plun∣der.
Come, let us go, and inquire how our affairs goes.
Now Affectionate, we have taken our leave of the States: I hope thy mind is at peace, and freed from fears of being staid.
Yes my my Lord.
They did persuade thee much to stay.
They seemed much troubled for your Lordships depar∣ture.
Truly I will say thus much for my self, that I have done them good service, and I must say thus much for them, that they have rewar∣ded me well.
I have heard, my Lord, that States seldom rewards a service done; wherefore I believe, they hope you will return again, and sees you for that end.
I shall not be unwilling when my Country hath no im∣ployment for me.
Methinks, my Lord, since you have gotten afame abroad, you should desire to live a settled life at home.
A settled life would seem but dull to me that hath no wife nor children.
You may have both, If you please, my Lord.
For children I desire none, since I have thee, and wives I care not for, but what are other men's.
From whence come thou friend?
From Rome, my Lord.
If you please to stay in the next room, I shall speak to you presently.
Affectionate, From whence do you think this Letter comes?
I cannot guess, my Lord.
From the Pope, who hath heard so much of thy youth, virtue, wit and courage, as he desires me to pass thorough Rome im my jour∣ney home, that he might see thee.
Pray Heaven his Holiness doth not put me into a Monaste∣rye, and force me to stay behind you.
If he should, I will take the habit, and be incloistered with thee; but he will not enforce a youth that hath no will thereto.
Truly my Lord, I have no will to be a Fryer.
Indeed it is somewhat too lazy a life, which all heroic Spirits shames, for those loves liberty and action: But I will go and dispatch this Messenger, and to morrow we will begin our journey.
Faith Amorous, it had been a victory indeed worth the brag∣ging off, if we could have taken Sir Peaceable Studious Loves prisoner, and could have infettered him in Cupid's bonds.
It had been a victory indeed, for I will undertake to enslave five Courtiers, and ten Soldiers, sooner, and in less time than one studious Scholar.
But some Scholars are more easily taken than the luxurious Courtiers, or deboist Soldiers.
O no! for Luxury and Rapine begets lively Spirits, but a study quenches them out.
One would think so by Sir Peaceable Studious, but not by some other Scholars that I am acquainted with.
But confess, Lady Wagtail, do not you find a studious Scho∣lar dull company, in respect of a vain Courtier, and a rough Soldier.
I must confess, they that study Philosophy, are little too much inclined to morality, but those that study Theology, are not so restrin∣gent.
Well, for my part, since I have been acquainted with Sir Peaceable Studious, I hate all Scholars.
Tic a wonder such a youth as the Lord Singularity's Son is, should have so great a wit, as to be able to dispute with so many Cardinals.
The greater wonder is, that he should have the better of them!
It is said the Pope doth admire him! and is extremely taken with him.
If Jove had so much admired him, he would have made him his Ganimed.
He offered to make him a living Saint, but he thanked his Holy∣nos, and said, he might Saint him, but not make him holy enough to be a Saint, for said he, I am unfit to have Prayers offered to me, that cannot offer Prayers as I ought, or live as I should; then he offered him a Cardinals hat, but he refused it; saying he was neither wise enough, nor old enough for to accept of it; for said he. I want Ulisses head, and Nestors years to be a Car∣dinal, for though less devotion will serve a Cardinal than a Saint, yet politic wisdom is required.
Pray Neighbours tell me which way, and by what means I may see this wonderful youth; for I have been out of the Town, and not heard of him.
You cannot see him now, unless you will follow him where he is gone.
Why, whether is he gone?
Into his own Country, and hath been gone above this week.
Nay, I cannot follow him thither.
Affectionate, you have promised me to be ruled by me in every thing, so that you may not part from me.
I have, my Lord, and will obey all your commands, so far as I am able.
Then I am resolved now I am returned into my own Country, to get thee a wife, that thy fame and worthy acts may live in thy Po∣sterity.
Jove bless me, a wife! by Heaven, my Lord, I am not man enough to marry!
There is many as young as you, that have been Fathers, and have had children.
If they were such as I am, they might father Children, but never get them.
Thou art modest, Affectionate, but I will have you marry, and I will chose thee such a wife, as modest as thy self.
Then we never shall have children, Sir.
Love and acquaintance will give you confidence; but tell me truly, Affectionate, did thou never court a Mistress?
No truly, Sir.
Well, I will have you practice Courtship, and though I will not directly be your Band or Pimp, yet I will send you amongst the effe∣minate Sex, where you may learn to sport with Ladies, as well as fight with Turks.
I can tell you news?
What news?
Sir Serious Dumb can speak again!
I am sorrow for that, for now he may tell tales out of School.
If he do, we will whip him with the rods of tongues, which is more sharp than the rods of wire.
We may whip him with words, but we our selves shall feel the smart of reproach.
How simply you talk, as if reproach could hurt a woman; when reproach is born with us, and dyes with us.
If reproach have no power of our Sex, why are all women so careful to cover their faults, and so fearful to have their crimes di∣vulged.
Out of two reasons; first, because those of the masculine Sex, which have power, as Fathers, Uncles, Brothers and Husbands; would cut their throats, if they received any disgrace by them; for disgrace belongs more to men than women; The other reason is, that naturally women loves secrets; yet there is nothing they can keep secret, but their own particular faults, neither do they think pleasure sweet, but what is stolen.
By your favour, women cannot keep their own faults se∣cret.
O yes, those faults that may ruin them if divulged, but they cannot keep a secret that is delivered to their trust; for naturally women are unfit for trust, or council.
But we are fit for faction.
The World would be but a dull World, if it were not for industrious factions.
The truth is, that if it were not for faction, the World would lye in the cradle of Peace, and be rocked into a quiet sleep of secu∣rity.
Pr•thee talk not of quiet, and peace, and rest, for I hate them as bad as death.
Indeed they resemble death, for in death there is no wars nor noise.
Wherefore it is natural for life, neither to have rest nor peace, being contrary to death.
My Lord, I hear the King hath invited you to attend him in his progress this Summer.
Yes, but I have made my excuse, and have got leave to stay at home; for I will tell thee truly, that I had rather march ten miles with an Artillery, than travel one with a Court; and I had rather fight a bat∣tel, than be bound to ceremony, or flattery, which must be practised if one live at Court: Besides, I have been bred to lead an Army, and not to follow a Court; And the custom of the one have made me unacquainted, and so unfit for the other; for though I may truly say I am a good Soldier, yet I will confess ingenuously to thee, I am a very ill Courtier.
I think they are the most happiest, that are least acquainted with a great Monarchs Court.
I will tell thee a discourse upon this theme in the time of Henry the eighth of England, there were many Courtiers of all degrees about him, and the theme of their discourse was, who was the happiest man in England; So all the Nobles and inferior Courtiers agreed unanimously it was his Majesty, and it could be no man else; and they all said, that their judgements was so clear in that point, that it could not admit of a country∣diction, or dispute: Said Henry the eighth, by the body of our Lord, you are all mistaken; then said one of the Courtiers, I beseech your Majesty to tell us who is the happiest man; By the Lord, said the King, that Gentle∣man that lives to his profit, and dare moderately spend for his pleasure, and that neither knows me, nor I know him, he is the happiest man in the King∣doom; and I am of Henry the eights opinion; but howsoever, it were better to be such a one that goes with the bag and baggage of an Army, than one of the tail of a Court.
But your Lordship would not refuse to be as the chief, as to be a Favourite; for a Favourite is more sought, feared and flattered, than the King himself.
I think I should not refuse to be a Favourite, by reason a Favourite is a General to command, Martial and Conduct in all affairs, both at home and abroad, in peace and in war, and all by the power and authority of the commission of Favourites.
Which Commission hath a greater and larger extent than any other Commission.
You say right, for it extends as far as the Kings power.
Madam, shall your wedding be private, or public?
Private.
I wonder you will have it private.
Why do you wonder?
Because the wedding-day is the only triumphant day of a young maids life.
Do you call that a triumphant day, that inslaves a woman all her life after; no, I will make no triumph on that day.
Why, you had better have one day than none.
If my whole life were triumphant, it would be but as one day when it was past, or rather as no day nor time; for what is past, is as if it never were; and for one day I will never put my self to that ceremonious trouble, which belongs to feasting; revelling, dressing and the like.
I perceive your Ladyship desires to be undressed upon the Wed∣ding-day.
No, that I do not, but as I will not be carelessly undressed, so I will not be dressed for a Pageant show.
I think there is no Family more methodically ordered, pru∣dently governed than your Lordships.
It were a disgrace to my profession, if I should not well know how to command; for a good Commander in the field, can tell how to be a good Manager in his private Family, although a prudent Master of a Family knows not how to be a skilful Commander in the field; but a pru∣dent Master must have a trusty Steward, so a knowing General must have a
careful and skilful Lieutenant-General, or else he will be very much trow∣bled; also both Master and General must have other Officers, or else they will not find their Accounts or Conquests as he hopes or expects; For neither General nor Master can order every particular command, nor rectify every particular error himself; for a Generals Office, is only to direct, order and command the chief Officers, and not the common Soldiers: So the Master of a Family, is only to direct, order and command his Steward, he the rest of the Officers, and the common servants, every one must order those that be∣longs to their several Offices.
Then the common Servants are like the common Soul∣diers.
They are so, and are as apt to mutiny, if they be not used with strict discipline: Thus, if a Master of a Family have the right way in the management of his particular affairs, he may thrive easily, have plenty, live peaceably, be happy, and carry an honourable port with an indif∣ferent Estate, when those of much greater Estates, which knows not, nor practices the right method, or rules and governs not with strictness, his ser∣vents shall grow factious, mutinous, and be always in bruleries, by which disorders his Estate shall waste invisible, his servants cozen egregiously; he lives in penury, his servants in riot, always spending, yet always wanting, forced to borrow, and yet hath so much, that if it were ordered with pru∣dence, might be able to lend, when by his imprudence, he is troubled with stores, yet vexed with necessity.
I should think that no man ought to be a Master of a Family, but those that can govern orderly and peaceably.
You say right, for every Master of a Family are petty-Kings, and when they have rebellions in their own small Monarchies, they are apt to disturb the general Peace of the whole Kingdom or State they live in; for those that cannot tell how to command their own Domestics, and pru∣dently order rheir own affairs, are not only useless to the Common-wealth, but they are pernicious and dangerous, as not knowing the benefit and noses∣city of obedience and method.
The Lord Singularity hath brought home the sweetest, and most beautifulest young Cavalier, as ever I saw.
Faith he appears like Atones.
Did you ever see Atones?
No, but I have heard the Poets describe him.
Venus and Atones are only two poetical Ideas, or two Ideas in poetical brains.
Why, Ideas hath no names.
O yes, for Poets christens their Ideas with names, as orderly as Christians Fathers doth their children.
Well, I wish I were a Venus for his sake.
But if you were only a poetical Venus, you would have little pleasure with your Atones.
Hay ho! He is a sweet youth.
And you have sweet thoughts of the sweet youth.
My thoughts are like Mirtle-groves to entertain the Idea of the Lord Singularity's Son.
Take heed there be not a wild-boar in your Myrtle Image∣nary Grove, that may destroy your Atones Idea.
There is no beast there, only sweet singing-birds called Nightingales.
Pray, my Lord, what Lady is that you make such inquiry for?
She is a Lady I would have thee marry; One that my Father did much desire I should marry, although she was very young, and may be now about thy years, I hear her Father is dead, but where the Lady is, I cannot find out.
Perchance she is married, my Lord.
Then we should find her out, by hearing who she hath married.
But if she be not married, she being as old as I, I am too young for her, for Husbands should be older than their wives.
But she is one that is well born, well bred, and very rich; and though thou art young in years, yet thou art an aged man in judgment, prudence, understanding, and for wit, as in thy flourishing strength.
Perchance, my Lord, she will not like me, as neither my years, my person, nor my birth.
As for thy years, youth is always accepted by the effe∣minate Sex; and thy person she cannot dislike, for thou art very handsome, and for thy birth, although thou art meanly born, thou hast a noble nature, a sweet disposition, a virtuous soul, and a heroic spirit; Besides, I have atop∣ted thee my Son, and the King hath promised to place my Titles on thee, and hath made thee Heir of my whole Estate, for to maintain thee according to those Dignities.
But I had rather live unmarried, my Lord, if you will give consent.
But I will never consent to that, and if you be duty∣full to me, you will marry such a one as I shall chose for you.
I shall obey whatsoever you command, for I have nothing but my obedience to return for all your favours.
Well, I will go and make a strict inquiry for this Lady.
Hay ho! what will this come to, I would I were in my Grave; for love and fear doth torture my poor life; Heaven strike me dead! or make me this Lords wife.
How shall we compass the acquaintance of the Lord Singularity's Son?
Faith Amorous, thou love boys, but I love men; wherefore I would be acquainted with the Lord Singularity himself; Beside, his adopted Son was a poor Beggar-boy it is said, and I cannot love one that is basely born.
His birth may be honourably, though poor, and of low and mean descent; for if he was born in honest wedlock, and of honest Parents, his birth cannot be base.
O yes, for those that are not born from Gentry, are like course brown bread, when Gentry of ancient descent, are like flower often bolted to make white mancher.
By that rule, surely he came from a Noble and Ancient Race; for I never saw any person more white and finely shaped in my life than he is; and if fame speaks true, his actions have proved he hath a Gen∣tlemans soul; But say he were meanly born, as being born from a Cottager, yet he is not to be despised nor disliked, nor to be less esteemed, or beloved, or to be thought the worse of, for was Lucan less esteemed for being a Stone-Cutter, or his wit less esteemed; or was King David less esteemed or obeyed, for being a Shepherd; or the Apostles less esteemed or believed, for being Fisher men, Tent-makers or the like; or the man that was chosen from the Plough, to be made Emperor; I say, was he less esteemed for being a Plough-man? No, he was rather admired the more; or was Horace esteemed, or his Poems thought the worse, for being Son to a freed man, which had been a slave; or was Homer less admired, or thought the worse Poet, for being a poor blind man; and many hundred that I cannot name, that hath gained fame, and their memories lives with Honour and Admiration in every Age, and in eve∣rye Nation, Kingdom, Country and Family, and it is more worthy, and those persons ought to have more love and respect, that have merit, than those that have only Dignity, either from favour of Princes, or descended from their Ancestors; for all derived Honours, are poor and mean, in respect of self-creating honour, and they only are to be accounted mean and base, that are so in themselves; but those that are born from low and humble Parents, when they have merits, and have done worthy actions, they are placed higher in fems Court, and hath more honour by fems report, which sounds their praises louder than those of greater descent, although of equal worth and merit, and justly, for it is more praise-worthy, when those that were the
lowest, and are as it were trod into the earth, or was born, as the phrase is, from the Dunghill, should raise themselves equal to the highest, who keeps but where they were placed by birth; but many times they keep not their place, but fall from the Dignity of their birth, into the myer of baseness, treachery and treason, when the other rises as the Sun out of a cloud of dark∣ness, darring forth glorious beams thorough all that Hemisphere.
I perceive by your discourse, Lovers are the best Disputers; Orators, and as I have heard, the best Poets; But I never heard you discourse so well, nor speak so honourably in all my life, wherefore I am confident, it was love spake, not you.
My child, we can no longer conceal you, for we are accu∣sed of murdering you, and are summoned to appear before a Judge and Jury.
For Heaven sake, conceal me as long as you can; for if I be known, I shall be utterly ruined with disgrace.
Whose fault was it? I did advise you otherwise, but you would not be ruled, nor counselled by me; and my Husband like an unwise man, did assist your childish desires.
Well wife, setting aside your wisdom, let us advise what is best to be done in this case.
In this case we are either to be hanged, or she is to be dis∣graced; and for my part, I had rather be hanged, for I am old, and cannot live long.
If you were a young wench, thou might chance to escape hanging, the Judges would have taken pity on thee, but being old, will con∣damn thee without mercy.
If I were not a pretty wench, and the Jury amorous men, at least the Judges so, I should be hanged nevertheless.
Come, come, Foster Father, and Nurse, let us go and ad∣vise.
Pray tell me, what manner of Country is Italy?
In short, Madam, there is more Summer than Winter, more Fruit than Meat, and more meat than Hospitality.
Why Captain, fruit is meat.
I mean flesh-meat.
Out upon that Country, that hath neither Flesh nor Hospi∣tality! But Captain, what are the natures, dispositions, and manners of the Italians?
In general, Madam, thus, their natures, dispositions, and manners are, as generally all other people of every other Nation are, for the generali∣tie of every Nation are alike, in natures, dispositions and persons; that is, some are of good, and some are of bad, some handsome, and some ill-favou∣red; but for the most part, there are more ill-favoured than handsome, more soul than fair, and the general manner of the whole World is, to offer more than present, to promise more than perform, to be more feigning than real, more courtly than friendly, more treacherous than trusty, more covetous than generous, and yet more prodigal than covetous; but as for the Italians, they are more luxurious than gluttonous, and they love pleasures more than Heaven.
They have reason, by my troth; for who can tell whether in Ioves Mansion, there are so many sweet and delightful pleasures, as in this World: But Captain, you do not tell me what pleasure the women have in Italy?
Those women that are married, are restrained and barred from all courtly pleasure, or as I may say, the pleasure of Courtships; but the Cour∣tezans have liberty to please themselves, and to be their own carvers.
And there is nothing I love so well, as to carve both for my self and others.
And there is no Nation in the World, so curious, and ingenuous in the art of carving, as the Italians.
I am resolved to go into Italy, if it be but to learn the art of carving, but I will leave my Husband behind me; for you say, wives have not that free liberty of carving, and if I leave my Husband, I may pass for a Widow, though not for a maid.
But Madam, you are past your travelling years, for the best time for women to travel, is about twenty.
By your favour, Sir, a woman never grows old, if she can but conceal her age, and say she is young.
But she must often repeat it.
She must so, which she may easily do, talking much, for women wants not words, neither are we sparing of them; But Captain, I must entreat your company, for you are acquainted with the Country, and hath the experience of the humours and natures of that people, and having been a Soldier and a Traveller, will not be to seek in the ways of our jour∣ney.
I shall wait upon you, Madam.
No Captain, you shall be as Master, to command, and I will be your Servant to obey.
You shall command me, Madam.
O! How my soul is tormented with love, shame, grief and fear (she stops a little) I am in love, but am ashamed to make it known, Besides, I have given the World cause to censure me, not only in concealing of my Sex, and changing of my habit, but being always in the company of Men, acting a masculine part upon the Worlds great Stage, and to the public view; but could I live thus concealed, I should be happy, and free from censure: But O cursed fortune! that pleasure takes in crossing Lovers, and basic time that makes all things as restless as it self, doth strive for to divulge my acts, when I have no defence, or honest means for to conceal them; for if I do oppose, I shall become a Murderer, and bear a guilty conscience to my grave, which may torment my soul, when as my body is turned to dust.
But since there is no remedy, i'll weep my sorrows forth, and with the water of my tears, i'll strive to quench the blushing heat, that like quick lightening, flashes in my face.
My dear Affectionate, What makes thee so melancholy, as to be always weeping?
I must confess, my Lord, here of late my eyes have been like Egypt, when it is over-flown with Nilus, and all my thoughts like Crocko∣diles.
What is the cause?
Alas, my Lord, causes lies so obscure, they are seldom found.
But the effects may give us light to judge what causes are.
Effects deceives, and often cozens us, by reason one effect may be produced from many several causes, and several effects proceeds from one cause.
But thy tears seems as if they were produced from some passion.
Indeed they are produced from passions and appetites, for pas∣sions are the rays of the mind, and appetites the vapour of the senses, and the rays of my mind hath drawn up the vapour of my senses into thick moist clouds, which falls in showering tears.
Tell me thy griefs, and thy desires, that I may help the one, and ease the other.
Alas, my Lord, I cannot, for they lye in the conceptions; and conceptions arises like mists, and my thoughts like clouds, lies one above another.
Come, come, let reason the Sun of the soul verify those misty conceptions, and disperse this dull humour, that the mind may be clear, and the thoughts serene.
I will strive to bring in the light of mirth.
Good Sir Humphrey Bold, carry us to the Court of Iudicatures, to hear the great Trial, which is said to be to day.
You would go to hear the condemnation of an old man, and his old wife.
No, we would go to hear the confessions, as whether they have murdered the young Lady that is missing, or not.
Why, that you may hear from other relations, as well as from their own mouths, and so save you so much pains and trouble, as you will have to get a place, and to stand so long a time, as the examining, accu∣sing, confessing, freeing, or condemning, which will require so long a time, as Ladies will find great inconveniences, and be put mightily to it.
But I long to hear and see the manner of it.
I will wait upon you, but you will be very much crowded.
I had rather see them hanged, if they be guilty, than hear them judged and condemned.
Why, a condemning Judge is the chief Hang-man, for he hangs with his word, as the other with a cord.
Will the Lord Singularity be there?
Yes certainly, for he is the man that doth accuse them.
And will his Son be there?
I know not that.
Who accuses these persons of murder?
I, my Lord.
We beseech your Honours, not to condemn us before you have found us guilty.
It is a proof sufficient, my Lord, they cannot clear them∣selves, or produce the party that was delivered to their trust and care.
Jury, do you find them guilty or not?
Guilty, my Lord.
Then from the Jury, we can—.
Hold, condemn not these innocent persons for their fidelity, constancy and love; I am that maid they are accused to murder, and by good circumstances can prove it.
Sure it is that face.
Shame stops my breath, and chokes the words I should utter.
For Heaven sake speak quickly, release my fears, or crown my joys.
My Lord, pray pardon loves follies, and condemn not my modesty for dissembling my Sex; for my designs were harmless, as only to follow you as a servant: For by Heaven, my Lord? my only desire was, that my eyes, and my ears might be fed with the sight of your person, and sound of your voice, which made me travel to hear, and to see you: But since I am discovered, I will otherwise conceal my self, and live as an Anchorite from the view of the World.
Pray let me live with you.
That may not be, for an Anchorite is to live alone.
If you will accept of me for your husband, we shall be as one.
You have declared against marriage, my Lord.
I am converted, and shall become so pious a devote, as I shall offer at no Alter but Hymens, and since I am your Convert, refuse me not.
I love too well to refuse you.
Here on my knee I do receive you as a blessing, and a gift from the Gods.
Most Reverend Judges, and Grave Jury, sentence me not with censure, nor condemn me to scandals, for waiting as a Man, and serving as a Page; For though I dissembled in my outward habit and behaviour, yet I was always chaste and modest in my nature.
Now Lady Amorous, is your mind a Mirtel-grove, and your thoughts Nightingales to entertain the Idea of your Atones.
Her discovery hath proved the boar that killed him; but I desire much to be army Atones Funeral, which is the Lady Orphants wed∣ding.
I am acquainted with some of the Lord Singularity's Cap∣tains and Officers, and I will speak to some of them to speak to the Lord Singularity to invite us.
I pray do, for since my Atones is dead, I will strive to in∣amour Mars, which is the Lord Singularity himself.
Faith, that is unfriendly done, for I have laid my designs for himself.
I fear both of our designs may come to nothing, he is so enamoured with his own She-Page, or female Son.
O Husband! This is the joyfullest day that ever I had in my whole life, except at mine own wedding.
Indeed, this day is a day of Jubilee.
Of Iuno, say you; but Husband, have you provided good cheer, and enough; for here are a world of Guests come, more than was invited, and you being Master Steward, will be thought too blame, if there be any thing wanting.
If you be as careful to dress the Brides Chamber, as I to provide for the bridal Guest, you nor I shall be in a fault.
I saith, if you have done your part, as I have done my part, we shall deserve praise.
I saith, we are almost so old, that we are almost past praise.
None can merit praise, but those in years; for all Worthy, Noble and Heroic Acts requires time to do them, and who was ever wise, that was young?
And few are praised that are old, for as fame divulgeth merits, so time wears out praise, for time hath more power than fame, striving to destroy what fame desires to keep. The truth is, time is a Glutton, for he doth not only strive to destroy what fame divulgeth, but what himself begets and produces.
We desire your Excellence will give us leave to present you with a Song written by my Lord Marquess of New-Castle.
Your present could have never been less acceptable, by reason it will retard my marriage.
Pray, my Lord, hear them.
Come, come, dispatch, dispatch.
Love in thy younger age,
Thou then turned Page;
When love then stronger grew,
The bright sword drew.
Then Love it was thy fate
To advise in State.
My Love adopted me
His child to be.
Then offered was my hap
A Cardinals Cap.
Loves juglings thus doth make
The Worlds mistake.
By Heaven, Musitioners, you are all so dillotarie with your damnable and harsh prologue of tuning before you play, as the next Parliament will make it felony in Fiddlers, if not treason, when your Great Royal Ears; begin with a F•• to you.
Why, my Noble Lord, we have done.
By Heaven, there spake Apollo! Give them ten Pieces.
Madam, an Eppilanian! we have more to express our further joy, and then we will pray for blessings on you both.
O! It will be my funeral song, you rogues, know all de∣lays doth kill me; and at this time your best Music sounds harsh, and out of tune.
Pray let them sing that one song more; so ends your trouble of them.
Begin, quick, quick.
O Love, some says thou art a Boy!
But now turned Girl, thy Masters joy.
Now cease all thy fierce alarms,
In circles of your loving arms.
Who can express the joys to night,
'Twil charm your senses with delight,
Nay, all those pleasures you'll control,
With joining your each soul to soul.
Thus in Loves raptures live, till you
Melting, dissolve into a dew;
And then your aerie journey take,
So both one constellation make.

THis Play I do present to Lady wits,
And hope the wit, each several humour fits;
For though all wit, be wit, as of wit kind,
Yet different be, as men, not of one mind;
For different men, hath different minds we know,
So different Wits, in different humours flow.
The choleric Wit is rough, and salt as brine,
The humble Wit flows smooth, in a strait line:
A wise Wit flows in streams, fresh, pure and clear,
Where neither weeds, nor troubled waves appear:
But a wild wit in every ditch doth flow,
And with the mud doth soul, and filthy grow.
Madam, Monsieur Importunate is come to visit you.
Did not I tell you, I would receive no visits to day.
I did tell him that you desired to be excused; but he said, he would not excuse you, for he must see you.
Go tell him I have taken Physic.
I did tell him so, but he said, he would stay until it had done worcester∣king.
I would it were working in his belly.
Lady, hearing of your great wit, I am come to prove report.
You will find him a liar, Sir.
I had rather report should be a liar, than I a Lover.
Why, then we agree in a mind, for I had rather be thought a fool, than to be troubled with a fools company.
You need not be troubled with that, for love is strongest absented.
O! but there is an old Proverb, that love will break tho∣rough stone-walls, wherefore if you be in love, you will haunt me like a Fai∣rye, no locks nor bolts will keep you out, for fairy love will creep thorough a crevice.
Faith Lady! I find now, that love is the Queen of Fey∣ries, for it hath crept thorough the key-hole of my ears, and hath got into my head, and their dances such roundelays, as makes my brain dizzy.
If once your brain begins to be dizzy, your senses will stagger, and your reason will fall down from its feat, and when the reason is displaced, and the wit is distempered, the mind become mad, and to prevent the mischief that may follow, I will depart in time.
You shall not pass, until you have paid me a tri∣bute.
What Tribute?
A kiss.
I will pay no such tribute, for I will bring such a number of words armed with such strong reasons, as they shall make my way.
Your words will prove poor Pilgrims, which come to offer at the Altar of my lips.
Nay, rather than so, they shall come as humble Petitioners, and as it were, kneeling at your heart, shall with innocence beg for gentle ci∣vility.
I will shut the gates of my ears against them, and my lips as a bar shall force them back, being a precise factious rout.
Satire shall lead my sharp words on, break op those gates, and anger like consuming fire shall both destroy your will and base desire.
I will try that.
But I will rather make a safe retreat, than venture, least your rude strength might overcome my words.
I will march after, at the heels of you.
Sir, you praise me so much, as I may doubt, or rather believe you flatter me; for it is not possible to be so rare a creature, as you ex∣press me to be, unless I were something divine, perchance I may be worthy of some of your inferior Praises, but not all your high and mighty ones.
You are more than either I can express, or think you to be.
Nay, if I be above your thoughts, I am above your de∣light; for man-kind takes no great pleasure in that they comprehend not.
I believe you do not comprehend how well I love you.
No truly, for love is like infinite, it hath no circumference, wherefore I will not trouble my self in loves ways, since it is an endless journey.
But surely, Lady, though you cannot find that worth in me, as merits your esteem and affection, yet you will favour me for your la∣theirs command, and love me for his desire.
If my Father desires me to dye, I shall satisfy his desire, for it is in my power to take away my own life, when I will; but it is not in my power to love those my Father would have me; for love is not to be com∣manded, nor directed, nor governed, nor prescribed, for love is free, and not to be controlled; Also I may marry a man my Father desires me, but sure my Father will not desire, nor command me to marry, if I cannot love the man he would have me marry, as I ought to do a Husband.
Madamosel Caprisia, there is a Gentleman, one of my acquain∣tance doth desire to see you.
He desires more than I do, for I never see a man, but I wish a vail before my sight, or one before his.
Have you taken a surfeit of eyes, as you hate to look on a mans face.
Yes, of wanton eyes, that skips from face to face, which makes me love the blind.
I wonder whether the soul may be satisfied, or surfeit as the sen∣ses do.
The thoughts, passions and appetites, which are begot betwixt the soul and senses, will surfeit, if they be over-fed.
What is that Lady that is over-fed?
A fools-head.
How can a fools head be over-fed?
With hearing and seeing more than it can digest into under∣standing.
You have not such a head, Lady, for your head is so full of wit, as it perpetually flows thorough your lips; yet whatsoever it doth re∣ceive, the Son of reason doth digest, and refines into spirits of senses.
I must confess, my tongue is more fertile than my brain, the which comes more words from the one, than sense or reason from the other; but least I should over-fill your ears with my idle talks, I will leave you.
And I will follow you, for my ears are unsatisfied, ha∣avenge but a taste of her wit, which makes a greater appetite.
Lady, you live, as if you lived not, living so solitary a life.
Indeed, few doth live as they should, that is, to live within themselves; for the soul, which is the supreme part of the life, is never at home, but goes wandering about, from place to place, from person to person, and so from one thing to another, and not only the soul wanders thus; but all the Family of the soul, as the thoughts and passions; for should any thing knock at the gates of the soul, which are the senses, or enter the cham∣bers of the soul, which is the heart, and the head, they would find them empty, for the thoughts and passions, which passions are of the Bed-cham∣ber, which is, the heart and Presence-chamber, which is, the head where∣in they ought to wait, are for the most part, all gone abroad; as for the thoughts, they are gone to inquire news, walking and running into every Vile∣lage, Town, City and Country, and Kingdom, all to inquire what such and such persons said or acted, and the particular affairs of every particular per∣son, and every particular Family, as whether they increase with riches, or decay with poverty; whether they live beyond their means, or keep within their compass; what men and women are in love, who are constant, and who are false; what contracts are signed, or what contracts are broken; who marries, and who lives single lives; who is happy in marriage, and who is not; what children is born, who hath children, and who hath none; who is handsome, and who is ill-favoured; who dyes, and of what diseases they died of; whether they left wealth or were poor, or who were their Heirs,
or Executors; who are Widowers, Widows or Orphants; who hath losses, crosses and misfortunes, who is in favour or disgrace with such Princes or States; who is at Law, what suits there is lost or gained; what bribes were given and taken, who was arrested, or imprisoned for debts; or set in the Pillory or Stocks for disorder, or cast into the Counter for misdemeanour; who is accused or imprisoned for Robbery, Murder or Treason; who is con∣damned or reprieved; what deaths they died, or torments endured; what Laws there is made, repeald or broke; what Officers or Magistrates there are made, placed or displaced, or put out; what factions or bruleries there is, what leagues and associates there is made betwixt States and Princes; what Wars, or Peace there is, or like to be betwixt such or such Kingdoms; what triumphs, or shevvs there is, or like to be; what Mountebanks, Tumblers, and Dancers there is; what strange Birds, Beasts or Monsters there is to be seen; what Drunkards, Bavvds and Whores there is, what Da••s hath been sought, and the cause of their quarrels; who hath lost at play, and who hath won, what new fashions there is; what Stuffs, Silks, Laces, and Embroideries there is; what Lords, Ladies, Knights or Esquires hath new Coaches or Live∣ries; what rich cloths they had, or have; what Church is most frequented, what Balls, Masks, Plays &amp; Feasts there is, or like to be, and many the like vain, idle, unuseful, unprofitable inquiries, observations and entertainments; their thoughts employs and vva•ts their time with: as for the passions and affe∣ctions, they are as much abroad, as the rest of the thoughts, some being with such and such men, or such and such women, as first with one, and then with another; or with such a house, or houses, or lands, or with such Jevv∣else, or Place, or Hangings, or Pictures, or the like; also the passions and af∣fections wander; amongst Beasts, as with such a Horse, Dog, Monkey, or the like; or with Birds, as with such a Hawk, Cock of the Game, or pra∣ting Parrot, or singing Linnet, or the like; or the passions and affections are attending, watching, or seeking after such or such Offices or Commands, Governments or Titles; nay, the very soul itself goes after such and such designs, so as it doth, as it were, run away from it self, it follows the World, and worldly things, but never draws any benefit to it self, but that soul that keeps at home, which very few souls doth; employs it self, for it self, it on∣lie views the World for knowledge, yet so, as it looks, as out of a window on a prospect, it uses the World out of necessity, but not serves the World out of slavery; it is industrious for its own tranquillity, fame and everlasting life, for which it leaves nothing unsought, or undone, is a wise soul.
Madam, my soul is tied to your soul, with such an un∣dissoulable knot of affection, that nothing, no, not death can lose it, nor break it asunder; wherefore, wheresoever your soul doth go, thine will follow it, and bear it company.
Then your soul will be incognito, for my soul will not know whether your soul will be with it, or not.
Faith Thom. its happy for thy soul, to be drawn by her magnetic soul; for that may draw, lead or direct thy soul to Heaven; otherwise thy soul will fall into Hell with the pressure of they sins, for thy soul is as heavy, as crime can make it.
Why, then the devil would have found my soul an honest soul, in being full weight, his true coin, &amp; the right stamp of his Picture, or Figure,
for which he would have used my soul well, and if Heaven gives me not this, Lady, Hell take me.
Certainly you may be the Devils guest, but whether you will be the Ladies Husband, it is to be doubted.
Well, I will do my endeavour to get her, and more, a man cannot do.
You are the rarest beauty, and greatest wit in the World.
Wit is like beauty, and beauty is oftener created in the fan∣cie, than the face; so wit oftener by opinion, than in the brain, not, but surely there may be a real beauty, and so a real wit, yet that real wit, is no wit to the ignorant, no more than beauty to the blind, for the wit is lost to the un∣derstanding, as beauty is lost to the eyes, and it is not in nature to give, what is not in nature to receive, nor in nature to show what is not in nature to be seen; so there must be eyes to see beauty, and ears to hear wit, and under∣standing to judge of both, and you have neither judgments eyes, nor under∣standings ears, nor rational sense.
Why, then you have neither beauty nor wit.
I have both, but your commendations are from report; for fools speaks by rote, as Parrots do.
She is like a Bee loaded with sweet honey, but her tongue is the sting, that blisters all it strikes on.
Lady, why are you so silent.
Why soul I speak to those that understands me not.
Why? are you so difficult to be understood.
No, but understanding is so difficult to find.
So, and since there is such a total decay of understanding in every brain, as there is none to be found, but in your own, you will make a new Common-wealth in yours, where your thoughts, as wife Magistrates, and good Citizens, shall govern and traffic therein, and your words shall be as Letters of Mart, and your senses shall be as legate Ambassadors that lives in other Kingdoms, which takes instructions, and give intelligence, or rather your thoughts are destinies, and fates, and your words their several de∣crees.
Do you think my thoughts can warrant Laws, or can my words decree them?
I believe your thoughts are so wise and just, that what∣soever they allow of, must be best, and your words are so witty, rational; po∣sitive and powerful, as none can contradict them.
Good Sir, contradict your self, or Truth will contradict you.
Nay faith, I will never take the pains to contradict my self; let Truth do what she will.
Daughter, did you entertain the Lady Visit civilly?
Yes Mother, extraordinary civilly, for I gave her leave to entertain herself with her own discourse.
That was rudely.
O no, for certainly it is the height of courtship to our sex, to let them talk all the talk themselves; for all women takes more delight to discourse themselves, than to hear another; and they are extremely pleased, if any listens, or at lest seems to listen to them, For the truth is, that tal∣king is one of the most luxurious appetites women have; wherefore I could not be more civiller, than to bar and restrain the effeminate nature in my self, to give her tongue liberty.
But you should have spoken a word now, and then, as giving her civilly some breathing rest for her discourse to lean upon.
Her speech was so strong, and long-winded, as it run with a full speed, without stop or stay, it neither need spur nor whip; the truth is it had been well, if it had been held in with the bridle of moderation, for it ran quite beyond the bounds of discretion, although sometimes it ran upon the uneven ways of slander, other times upon the stony ground of censure, and sometimes in the soul ways of immodesty, and often upon the furrows of non-sense; besides, it did usually skip over the hedges of Truth, and certainly, if the necessities of nature, and the separations of Neigh-bour∣hood, and the changes and inter-course of, and in the affairs of the World, and men did not forcibly stop, sometimes a women's tongue, it would run as far as the confines of death.
But let me tell you Daughter, your tongue is as sharp, as a Serpents sting, and will wound as cruelly and deadly where it bites.
It proves my tongue a women's tongue.
Why should a women's tongue have the effects of a Serpents sting.
The reason is evident, for the great Serpent that tempted, and so perverted our Grandmother Eve in Paradise, had a monstrous sting, and our Grandmother whetted her tongue with his sting, and ever since, all her effe∣minate rase hath tongues that stings.
Lady, Monsieur Nobilissimo is so in love with you, as he cannot be happy, until you be his wife.
I wonder he should be in love with me, since I have neither beau∣tie to allure him, nor so much riches, as to entice him, nor wit to persuade him to marry me.
But Lady, you have virtue, good nature, sweet deposit∣on, graceful behaviour, which are sufficient Su•jests for love to settle on, did you want what you mentioned, out you have all, not only what any man can with or desire with a wife, but you have as much as you can wish and desire to have your self.
I will rather be so vain, as to strive to believe you, than rudely to contradict you.
It is neither erroneous, nor vain to believe a truth, Lady.
Nor civil to make a doubt, Sir; but I am obliged unto you for that, you help to cover my defects, and wants in nature, with your civil com∣mendation, and your kind estimation of me.
My fair wit, you look as if you were angry with me.
You dwell not so long in my mind, as to make me angry, my thoughts are strangers to your figures.
Nay faith, now I have you, I will keep you perforce, until you pay me the kiss you owe me.
Let me go, for I had rather my eyes were eternally sealed up, my ears for ever stopped close from sound, than hear or see you.
I care not whether you hear, or see me, so you will kiss me.
Let me go, or otherwise my lips shall curse you, and my words be∣ing whetted with injury, are become so sharp, as they will wound you.
I will keep you until your words begs for mercy in the most humblest stile, and after the most mollifying manner.
Hell take you, or Earth devour you like a beast, never to rise.
Love strike your heart with shooting thorough your eyes.
May you be blown up with pride, until you burst into madness, may your thoughts be more troubled than rough waters, more raging than a tempest; may your senses feel no pleasure, your body find no rest, nor your life any peace.
May you love me with a doting affection; may I be the only man you will embrace, and may you think me to be as handsome as Narcis∣suss did himself.
You appear to me in all the horrid shapes that fancy can in∣vent.
Why, how now daughter, always quarrelling.
Can you blame me, when I am beset with rudeness, and assaulted with uncivil actions.
Let her alone, Monsieur Importunate, for she is a very Shrew.
Well, go thy ways, for all the Shrews that ever nature made, you are the cursest one.
I am not of the humour; as most women are, which is, to please themselves with thinking, or rather believing, that all men that looks on them, are in love with them: But I take pleasure, that all men that I look on, should think I am in love with them; which men will soon be∣lieve, being as self-conceited as women are.
But where is the pleasure, Lady.
Why, in seeing their fantastical garbs, their strutting postures, their smiling faces, and the jackanapesly actions, and then I laugh in my mind, to think what fools they are, so as I make my self merry at their folly, and not at my own.
But men will appear as much Jackanapeses, when they are in love with you, as if they thought you were in love with them, for all Lovers are apish, more or less.
I grant all Lovers are, but those that think themselves beloved, ap∣pears more like the grave Baboon, than the skipping Iackanapes; for though their actions are as ridiculous, yet they are with more formality, as being more circumspectly foolish, or self-conceitedly vain.
Well, for all your derisions and jesting at men, I shall see you at onetime or other, shot with Cupids arrovv.
By deaths dart, you may; but never by loves arrovv; for death hath power on me, though love hath none.
There is an old saying, that time, importunity and opportunity, wins the chastest She, when those are joined with wealth and dignity; but
to yield to a lawful love, neither requires much time, nor pleading, if the Sui∣ters have but Person, Title and Wealth, which women for the most part do prize, before valour, wisdom or honesty.
Women hath reason to prefer certainties before uncertainties; for men's Persons, Titles and Welds, are visible to their view and knowledge, but their Valours, Wisdoms and Honesties, doth rest upon Faith; for a coward may fight, and a fool may speak rationally, and act prudently some∣times, and a knave may appear an honest man.
They may so, but a valiant man, will never act the part of a cow∣art; nor a wise man prove a fool, nor an honest man appear a knave.
There can be no proof of any mans Valour, Wisdom or Ho∣nasty, but at the day of his death, in aged years, when as he hath past the danger in Wars, the trials in Miseries, the malice of Fortune, the tempta∣tions of Pleasures, the enticements of Vice, the heights of Glory, the changes of Life, provokers of Passion, deluders of Senses, torments of Pain, or painful Torments, and to chose a Husband that hath had the Trials, and ex∣periences of all these, is to chose a Husband out of the Grave, and rather than I will marry death, I will live a maid, as long as I live, and when I dye, let death do what he will with me.
Well met, I have travelled thorough all the Town, and have inquired of every one I could speak to, and could neither hear of thee, nor see thee.
It were happy for me, if I had neither ears nor eyes.
Why, what is the matter, man?
The chiefest friend I had, which mas my heart; For that is dead, being killed with my Mistress cruelty, and buried in her incon∣stance.
I dare swear, not the whole heart; for every mans heart, is like a head of Garlic, which may be divided into many several cloves: Wherefore, cheer up, man; for it is but one clove, that death, or love, hath swallowed down into his Stomach, to cure him of the wind-cholick; and since thy heart hath so many cloves, thou may well spare him one, and be never the worse; But if it be buried, as you say, in your Mistresses incon∣stance; it is to be hoped it will be converted into the same inconstant humour, and that will cure the other part of thy heart.
O! She was the Saint of my thoughts, and the Goddess of my soul.
Prithee let me be thy moral Tutor, to instruct thee in the know∣ledge of Truth, and to let thee know, that virtue is the true Goddess, to which all men ought to bow to; and that youth, beauty and wealth, are sixth to be forsaken, when virtue comes in place; and virtue is constant, both to its principals and promises; Wherefore, if thy Mistress be inconstant, she cannot be virtuous, wherefore let her go.
I think his heart is dead in good earnest; for it hath no sense of what I have said.
Daughter, you have a sufficiency of wit and beauty, to get many Lovers to chose a Husband, if you had but patience to enter∣tain, and prudence to keep them; But your being cross, will lose your Lo∣verse, as soon as your beauty hath taken them.
It is no prize for a woman to have such Lovers, that hath amo∣rous natures; for it is their nature that drives them to her, and not the women's beauty or wit, that draws them to her; and there is less force required to drive, than to draw; but the truth is, that most men hath such threed-bare souls, as if the nap of their understanding were worn of; or indeed, their souls seems, as if there were never any woven thereon, as that nature hath made all their souls, thin and course, or as if time had Moath-eaten them, which makes me, although not to hate you, yet to despise that Sex; for men that should imitate the Gods, yet are they worse than Beasts, which makes me shun their beastly company.
Daughter, you speak and judge passionately, and passion can never reason well; for how is it possible, for reason to exercise its function, when passion opposes, and is too strong for it.
Truth may be delivered in passion, but not corrupted with passion; for truth is truth, howsoever it be divulged, or else it is no truth, but false∣hood.
You are wondrous fine, to day, Madam.
If I seem fine, to day, I am obliged more to my fancy, than my wealth, for this finery.
The truth is, you are so adjousted, so curiously accoutred, as I perceive, judgement and wit were joined associates in your dressing.
I had rather be commended, or applauded for judgement and wit, than for wealth and beauty; for I had rather have my soul commended, than my person, or fortunes.
Certainly, I believe you have a more rational soul, than any other of your Sex have.
Alas? My soul is but a young soul, a mere Novice soul, it wants growth, or my soul is like a house, which time the architectour hath newly begun to build; and the senses, which are the Labourers, wants information and experience, which are the material for the rational soul to be built on, or with; but such materials as hath been brought in, I strive and endeavour to make the best, and most convenient use for a happy life.
How say you? the best use for a good Wife!
No, that little reason I have, tells me, to be a Wife, is to be unhap∣pie, for content seldom in marriage dwells, disturbance keeps possession.
If you dispraise marriage, you will destroy my hopes, and frustrate my honest design.
Why? what is your design?
To be a Suitor to you.
And what is your hopes?
To be your Husband.
If I thought marriage were necessary, although unhappy, yet there would be required more wit and judgement in choosing a Husband than in dressing my self; wherefore it were requisite, that some of more wit and judgement than my self, should chose for me, otherwise I may be betrayed by flattery, outward garb, insinuations or false-hood, and through an unex∣perienced innocence, I may take words and shows, for worth and merit, which I pray the Gods I may not do; for to marry an unworthy man, were to me to be at the height of affliction, and marriage being unhappy in it self, needs no addition to make it worse.
Madam? Discretion forbids me to commend my self, although I am a Lover; For had I merits worthy great praises, it were unfit I should mention them; but there is not any man or woman, that is, or can be ex∣actually known, either by themselves or others; for nature is obscure, she no∣ver divulges herself, neither to any creature, nor by, or through any creature; for the hides herself under infinite varieties, changes and chances; She dis∣guises herself with antic Vizards, she appears sometimes old, sometimes young, sometimes voted and withered, sometimes green and flourishing, sometimes feeble and weak, sometimes strong and lusty, sometimes defor∣med, and sometimes beautiful; sometimes she appears with horror, some∣times with delight, sometimes she appears in glimsing lights of knowledge,
then clouds herself with ignorance. But, Madam, since we are as ignorant of our souls, as of our fortunes, and as ignorant of our lives, as of our deaths; we cannot make any choice upon certainties, but upon uncertainties, and if we be good whilst we live, our deaths will be our witness to prove it; in the mean time, let our promises stand bound for us, which is the best engagement we can give; although it may sail; and let our marriage be as the Bond of agreement, although we may forfeit the same, yet let us make it as sure as we can.
I will consider it, and then I will answer your request.
That is, to yield.
It is like enough.
My fair Shrew, are you walking alone.
My thoughts are my best Companions.
Pray, let a thought of me be one of the company.
When you enter into my mind, you do appear so mean, as my nobler thoughts, scorns that thought that bears your figure.
Thoughts are as notes, and the tongue is the Fiddle that makes the music; but your words, as the cords, are out of tune.
You say so, by reason they are not set to your humour, to sound your praise.
I say you are very handsome, nature hath given you a surpas∣sing beauty, but pride and self-conceit, hath cast such a shadow, as it hath darkened it, as vaporous clouds doth the bright Sun.
Your opinions are cloudy, and your tongue like thunder, strikes my ears with rude, uncivil words.
I perceive humility, dwells not with beauty, nor with; but is, as great a stranger, as with Riches and Titles.
Madam, the same of your wit, drew me hither.
I am sorry my wit hath a greater fame, than my worth, that my vain words should spread further than my virtuous actions, for noble fame is built on worthy deeds.
But it were pity you should bury your wit in silence; Besides, your discourse may profit the hearers, either with delight or instruct∣once.
O no, for discourses pleases according to the humour, or under∣standing of the hearers; Besides, it is the nature of mankind, to think each other fools, and none but themselves wise; Then why should I wast my life to no purpose, knowing times motion swift.
You do not wast your life through your words, if your words gets you a fame, and esteem of the World.
What shall I be the better, in having the VVorlds esteem, nay, it is likely that praises (whilst I live) may do me harm, creating vain and false opinions in my imaginations of self-conceit, of being wiser, or wittier, than really I am; which opinions may make me commit errors, and I had rather the World should laugh at me, for want of wit, than scorn me for my follies.
But if witty discourses, will get you an esteem, what will your wise actions, and virtuous life; and praise is the reward to all noble en∣devours; beside, praise is no burden, but it often serves as a balance, to make the life swim steady in Sea-faring World: But yet, Lady, I would not have your wit out-run your praise, which it will do, if you spur it too hard, for wit must be used like a strong spirited horse, it must be restraind with a bridle, not pricked with the spur, least it should run away, and fling the Rider, which is, the Speaker, into a ditch of disgrace; neither must it run wildly about, but must be wrought, to obey the hand and the heel, which is, time and occasion, to stop, and to change, as when to speak, and to whom to speak, and on what to speak, and when to make a stop of silence, other∣wise, it will run out of the smooth paths of civility, or the clean ways of modesty: Besides, wit must not only be taught, to amble in rhyme, and to trot in prose, but to have a sure footing of sense, and a settled head of reason, least it should stumble in disputes, or fall into impertinent discourses; like∣wise, wit may be taught to go in aires of fancies, or low, upon the ground of proof.
But Sir, you must consider, that women are no good managers of wit, for they spoil all their tongue rides on, hackneys it out, until it be∣comes a dull jade.
Least I should give an ill example of tyreing in our allego∣recall discourse, I shall kiss your hands, and take my leave for this time.
Monsieur Discretion is a handsome man, he hath a wise count∣nonce, and a manly garo; his discourse is rational and witty, sober and di∣forced: But good Lord! how foolishly I talk to him? I never spake duller, nor so senselessly, since I was taught words, and he came purposely, as he told me, to hear me speak, and prove my wit; But it was a sign he heard none, for he grew soon a weary of my company, he staid so short a time: I am troubled often with prating fools, whose visits are as tedious, as their discour∣ses: But Lord! why do I condemn others, as fools, when this Gentleman, Monsieur Discretion, hath proved me one.
What? musing by your self, alone! May I question your oughts?
If you do, you will not be resolved, for there is none at home, to give you an answer.
Why, where are they? wandering abroad?
They like a brood of Birds, are flown out of their Nests; for thoughts flies with swifter speed, than time can do, having large wings, of quick desire.
Faith, you are a great wit!
You are a great trouble!
What, you will not force me to stay against my will?
Yes, that I will; For your Father saith, you shall be my Wife, and then you will embrace, and kiss me, as coy as you are now.
Which if I do, I wish my arms, when they do wind about your waste, may sting as Serpents, and that my kisses may prove poison to your lips.
What, are you seriously angry; Nay, then it is time to leave you.
I have heard, that gallant men are civil to our Sex, but I have met with none, but rough, rude, rugged natures, more cruel than wild Tygars.
Why do you complain of our Sex, Lady? what is it you would have?
I would have a gray-headed wisdom, a middle-aged humour, a
fresh mouthed wit, a new bloomed youth, and a beauty that every one fan∣cies.
Why, so you have.
Then I have what I desire.
O! She hath a sharp wit, it is vitral wit.
Lady, you have killed a Gentleman.
Who, I! why, I never had the courage to kill a fly.
You have killed him with your disdain.
I am sorry he had so weak a life, as so slight a cause, as a women's disdain, could destroy it; but for my part, I disdain no man, although I can∣not intimately love all men.
He is but one man, Lady.
And I have but one particular love to give, or rather I may say, to be gained, for I cannot dispose of it; for it will be only disposed by it self, without my leave, so as I must be guided by that which will not be guided by me? I can lend my pity, but not give him my love.
I suppose you have given him some encouragement, and hopes, if not an assurance, by reason, he says, you have forsaken him.
Not unless common civility, be an encouragement, and ordinary conversation gives hopes; as for an assurance, indeed I gave Monsieur Pro∣fession; For I did assure him, I could not love him, as he would have me love him, as Husband. But, O vain man! to brag of that he never had.
It is no brag, Lady, to confess he is forsaken.
It is a brag, for in that he implies, he hath been beloved, for the one must be, before the other.
Pray Madam, let me persuade you, to entertain his love, he is a Gentleman who hath worth, person and wealth, all which he offers you, as to his Goddess, and a good offer is not to be refused, Lady, when it may lawfully be taken.
You say true, Sir, and could I persuade my love, as easily as you can commend the man, it is likely I should not refuse him.
But you will be thought cruel, to let a Gentleman dye, for want of your love.
Why, put the case I have other Lovers, as passionate, and worthy as he; how would you have me divide my self amongst them? Or can you
tell me how to please them; I cannot marry them all, the Laws forbids it, and to be the common Mistress to them, all honour, and honesty forbids it; for though there is some excuse for men, who hath by custom their liberty in amours, because their amours obstructs not nature, so makes breach of honesty; but women are not only barred by nature, but custom of subjection, and modesty of education, wherefore, if they should take liberty to seve∣ral Lovers, or loves courtships, they would not only dishonour themselves, and their whole Sex, and their living friends; but their dishonour would out∣reach their Posterity, and run back to their Fore-fathers, that were dead long, long before they were born; for their unchaste lives, would be as marks of disgrace, and spots of infamy upon the Tombs of those dead Ancestors, and their ashes would be fulled with their stains, whereas, a chaste woman, and a gallant man, obliges both the living, and the dead; for they give honour to their dead Ancestors in their Graves, and to those friends that are living in the World, and to those that shall succeed them; Besides, their exam∣ples of their vermes, for all Ages to take out patterns from.
Madam, you have answered so well, for your self, and Sex, as I can say no more in the behalf of my friend.
Daughter, your tongue is so sharp, as it is not only pointed, but edged on both sides.
Use, Mother, will blunt the point, and flat the edges.
No, Daughter, the more it is used, the sharper it will be, for words and passions, are the whetstones to that Razor.
As long as that Razor shaves no reputation, let it raze, or shave, what it will.
Madamosel Solid, what say you to Monsieur Ralleries wit?
I say of him, as I would of a wild or skittish jade, who hath only strength to kick and fling, but not to travel, or to bear any weight; so Raillery, is antic postures, and laughing reproaches, not solid and judicious discourses, or continued speeches, the truth is, a ralleying wit, is like obe∣structed, or corrupted lungs, which causes difficult, and short breathing; So that wit, is short and pussing, spurting out words, questions and replies; it is squib wit, or boys sport
Madamosel Doltche, what say you of Monsieur Satericals wit?
As I would of frosty weather; his wit is sharp, but wholesome, and though he hath a frowning brow, yet he hath a clear soul.
Madamosel Volante, What say you of Monsieur Pedants wit.
As I would of Leeches; for as Leeches sucks blood from the back parts of men, and spues it forth, when rubbed with salt; so Monsieur Pedant sucks wit from other men's pens, and mouths, and then spues it sorth again; being rubbed with the itch of praise; But all the learned knows, the wit was no more his own, than the blood that was sucked, was the Lee∣ches.
What say you of Monsieur Lyricks wit?
As I would of a Bird, that chirps more than sings.
Madamosel Doltche, What say you of Monsieur Tragedians wit?
As I would of Winter, wherein is more rain than Sun-shines, more storms than calms, more night than day; so his wit, hath more melan∣cholly than mirth, causing, or producing tears, sighs and sadness; the truth is, his wit dwells in the shades of death.
Madamosel Solid, what say you to Monsieur Comicals wit?
As I would of the Spring, which revives, and refreshes the life of every thing, it is lightsom and gay; So Monsieur Comicals wit is cheerful, pleasant, lively, natural and profitable, as being edifying.
Daughter, let me tell you, you have brought your Hogs to a fair Market.
That is better, than to keep them in a foul sty, Mother.
You cannot speak without crossing.
Nor readily cross without speaking.
I am sure, your bitter discourses, and cross answers, hath caused the Lady, namely, the Lady Hercules, to send a railing message, by a Mizzen∣ger, to declare her anger for your abusive discourses against her.
I never mentioned her in my discourse, in my life.
But you speak against big, and tall women.
I gave but my opinion of the size, and Sex, not of any particular, and I may speak freely, my opinion of the generalities.
You may chance, by your opinion of the generalities, to be gene∣rally talked of.
Why, then I shall live in discourse, although discourse were dead in me, and who had not rather live, although an ill life, than dye?
But you might live so, as to gain every bodies good opinion, if you would palliate your humour, and sweeten your discourse, and endeavour to please in conversation.
Which do you mean, Mother! either to please my self, or the company?
Why, the company.
That is impossible, for in all company, there is diversities, and contrarieties of humours, passions, appetites, delights, pleasures, opinions, judgements, wits, understandings, and the like, and for talking, speaking and discoursing, they are inter-changing, inter-mixing, reasoning, arguing dispu∣ting, which causes contradictions, wherefore to agree in, and to every hue∣more, passion, opinion, and discourse, is impossible; indeed one may seem∣lie, or truly agree, and approve of any one opinion or discourse; but not a diversity of discourses, opinions; also one may flatteringly applaud, or sooth any particular persons humour, but not diverse persons, diverse hue∣morse, but to flatter, is base, as to approve in their words, and disapprove in their thoughts, as to commend, or applaud that, or those, that is not praise-worthy: But howsoever, for the soothing of any bodies humour, I will no∣ver take the pains, for why should I make my self a slave to the several hue∣morse of mankind, who is never in one humour two minutes, and why may not I think, or desire to be flattered, and humoured, as well as others, and when I am not flattered, and humoured, to be as much displeased at others, as others at me: Wherefore, good Mother, be not you displeased, that I chose rather to displease my self, than any body else, besides your self.
You will follow your own ways, Daughter.
I cannot walk safer, than in my own ground, Mother.
Dear Mistress, I fear my absence hath made you forget me.
No certainly, I cannot forget you, by reason my brain is hung about with the memory of your worthy nature, and meritorious actions; which my love doth admire, and takes delight for to view each several piece and part.
Do you love me?
How can I chose but love, when in my infancy, such a number of words, in your praise, was thrown into my ears, like seeds into the Earth, which took root in my heart, from which love sprouted forth, and grew up with my years.
And will you be constant?
As day is to the Sun!
Do you speak truth?
Truly, I have been bred up so much, and so long, in the ways of truth, as I know no tract of dissembling; and therefore, certainly, my words will ever keep within the compass of Truth, and my actions will always turn, and run with that bias, but why do you seem to doubt, in making such questions.
I will truly confess, I have heard, that since I have been in the Country, you had entertained another Lover.
It's false, but false reports, is like breathing upon a pure and clear Glass, it dimns it for a time; but that malicious breath, soon vanishes, and leaves no stain behind it; so I hope your jealousy will do the like, it will vanish, and leave no doubt behind it.
I hope you are not angry with me, for telling you, or for being my self troubled, at what was reported.
No, for innocence is never concerned, it always lives in peace and quiet, having a satisfaction in it self, wherefore reports only seizes on the guilty, arresting them with an angry turbulence.
But, perchance you may be angry for my jealousy.
No, for jealousy expresses love, as being afraid to lose, what it desires to keep.
Then, I hope you do not repent the love you have placed on me.
Heaven may sooner repent of doing good, than I repent my love and choice.
Dear Mistress, my mind is so full of joy, since it is cleared of suspicion, and assured of your love, as my thoughts doth fly about my brain, like birds in Sun-shine weather.
Sweet Lady, will you give me leave to be your Servant!
I wish I were a Mistress worthy of your service.
There is no man shall admire more your beauty, and wit, nor be more diligent to your youth, nor shall honour your merits, and love your virtue more than I.
Indeed, I had rather be honoured for my merit, than for my birth, for my breeding, than for my wealth, and I had rather be beloved for my virtue, than admired for my beauty; and I had rather be commended for my silence, than for my wit.
It were pity you should bury your great wit in silence.
My wit is according to my years, tender and young.
Your wit, Lady, may entertain the silver haired Sages.
No surely, for neither my years, nor my wit, are arrived to that degree, as to make a good companion, having had neither the experience of time, nor practice of speech; for I have been almost a mute hitherto, and a stranger to the World.
The World is wide, and to travel in it, is both dangerous and difficult; wherefore, you being young, should take a guide, to protect and direct you, and there is no Guide nor Protector so honourable, and safe, as a Husband; what think you of marriage.
Marriage, and my thoughts, live at that distance, as they seldom meet.
Why, I hope you have not made a vow, to live a single life.
No, for the Laws of Morality, and Divinity, are chains, which doth sufficiently restrain mankind, and ties him into a narrow compass; and though I will not break those chaining Laws, to get lose, and so become lawless; yet I will not tie nature harder with vain opinions, and unnecessary vows, than she is tied already.
You shall need no Tutor, for you cannot only instruct your self, but teach others.
Alas, my brain is like unplanted ground, and my words like wild fruits, or like unprofitable grain, that yields no nourishing food to the understanding; Wherefore, if I should offer to speak, my speech must be to ask questions, not to give instructions.
Certainly, Lady, nature did study the architectour of your form, and drew from herself the purest extractions, for your mind, and your soul, the essence or spirits of those extractions, or rather you appear to me, a miracle, something above nature, to be so young and beautiful, and yet so virtuous, witty and wise, graced with such civil behaviour; for many a grave beard, would have wagg'd with talking, less sense, with more words.
Youth and age, is subject to errors, one for want of time to get experience, the other through long time, wherein they lose their me∣mori.
Pray let me get your affections, and then I shall not lose my hopes of a virtuous Lady to my wife.
Lady, are you walking studiously alone? may I not be thought rude, if I should ask what your studies are?
I am studying, how some studies for pain, some pleasure, some dangers, some quarrels, some to be wicked, some to be learned, some to be ignorant, some to be foolish, some to be famous, but few to be wise.
Who studies to be wicked?
Thieves, Murderers, Adulterers, Liars, and Extortioners.
Who studies to be learned?
Linguists.
Who studies to be ignorant?
Divines.
Who studies quarrels?
Lawyers.
Who studies dangers?
Soldiers.
Who studies to be fools?
Buffoons.
Who studies fame?
Poets.
Who studies pleasure?
Epicures.
Who studies pain?
Epicures.
Do Epicures study both for pain, and pleasure?
Yes, for they that surfeit with pleasure, must endure pain; and Epicures studies the height of pleasure, which no sooner enjoyed, but pain follows.
Who studies to be wise?
They that study Temperance, Prudence, Fortitude and Ju∣stice.
And, what study you?
I study how I may avoid the company of mankind, also, to be quit of your Lordships presence.
She is so handsome, no humour can ill become her.
Thom. Give me leave to rejoice with thee, for the resurrecti∣on of thy heart, that was killed with thy Mistresses cruelty, and buried in her constancy.
Well, well? make your self merry.
But prithee, in what plight is thy heart? I doubt it is lean, weak and pale, and in a puling condition, lying in the Grave of thy Mistresses in∣constancy.
Faith, I cannot tell; the good Angel that brought into life, can give a better account of it, than I can.
Where shall I seek this good Angel? amongst the effeminate or masculine Sex: For I suppose, it is an Angel that is of one Sex, although I have heard, Angels are of neither Sex; but prithee, of which shall I in∣quire.
Of the divine Sex, and the divinest of her Sex.
You may as well bid me inquire of that which is not to be found, for every particular man that is a Servant to any particular of these an∣gelical creatures, will prefer his own Mistress, to be the divinest, and so the most absolutest.
All men that sees my Mistress, and doth not adore her, as the only She, is damned in ignorance, and condemned to perpetual blindness.
Say you so, then I will not see her, for fear I should be one of the damned, and therefore I will give over that design, as the search of her, and go to a Tavern, and drink the good health of thy heart, and leave the in∣quiry after it, and if you will go with me, so.
I cannot, without the breach of gratitude, deny thy kindness; wherefore, I will bear thee company.
O, you are welcome, Doctor Freedom.
If I be not welcome now, I shall never be welcome.
Why, Doctor? what Present have you brought us? that can make you so acceptable, is it perpetual youth, or undeniable beauty, or ever∣lasting life? But prithee, Doctor, what is it that will make thee so well∣come?
Why, my self; here being so many young Ladies together, and not a man amongst them.
Thy self, Doctor! why, thou art not worth the dregs of an Ur∣nal, of a sick water, if it were not for our charity, and generosity, more than thy merit, ability or service, you would have but a cold entertainment, and a rule welcome.
Well, my young, witty, satirical Patient, you will take a surfeit of fruit, milk, puddings, pies, or sweet-meats, one of these days, and then you will flatter me.
You say right, Doctor; but now I speak truth, and is not that better than to flatter, or dissemble; For there is none but sick, and depraved souls, that will deliver Truth with a quarter, half, or three quartred face, like Merchants, or mechanic, that would sell off their ill commodities, with a broken light, but a noble and healthful soul, shows the full face of Truth, in a clear light; wherefore, the sick and base, will flatter, but the noble and free, will speak truth.
Well, I am sure you think better of me in your thoughts, than your words expresses.
Let me tell you, my words and thoughts, are so well acquainted, as they never dissemble, and there is such a friendship betwixt them, as they never move several ways, but runs even together: But let me tell thee, Do∣ctor, I have such a spleen to thy Sex, as I desire to kill them, at least, to wound them with spiteful words; and I wish I had beauty enough for to damn them, causing them to be perjured, by forsaking other women, they were bound by sacred vows, and holy bonds.
It is well, Master Doctor, that you can be privileged amongst the young Ladies, at all times, when such as I, that have not your Profession, are oftentimes shut, and locked out.
Faith, if you have no better entertainment, than I have had since I came, it were better you were from them, than with them, for their tongues are as sharp as needles.
It is a sign we want work, when we are forced to stitch our wit upon you.
How dare you anger the Doctor, when your life lies upon his skill.
O! His skill lies upon chance, and it is a chance, whether he kills, or cures, is it not, Doctor?
No, for I can kill my Patients, when I will, although not cure them, when I will.
Well, then, Doctor, when I would dye, I will send for you, but not when I would live.
Your Servant, Ladies.
Good Lady Wit, follow Monsieur Discretion, he will make you a wise Lady, and make your wit discreet, as it should be.
O Doctor! how you mistake, for wit cannot be made, it is a Creator, and not a Creature; for wit was the first Master, or Mistress of Arts; the first Husband-man, Granger, Gardiner, Carver, Painter, Graver, Caster and Molder, Mason, Joiner Smith, Brasier, Glazier, the first Chand∣ler, Vintener, Brewer, Baker, Cook, Confectioner, the first Spinster, VVeaver, Knitter, Tailor, Shoo-maker, and millions the like; also wit was the first Navigator, Architector, Mathematician, Logitian, Geometrician, Cosmo∣grafir, Astronomer, Astrologer, Philosopher, Poet, Historian and Hearold; also wit made the first Common-wealth, invented Laws for Peace, Arms for VVars, Ceremonies for State and Religion; also music, dancing, dressing, masking, playing for delight and pleasure; wit divides time, employs time, prevents time, and provides for time; it makes Heavens, and Hells, Gods and Devils.
Well, go thy ways, for though thou hast a heavenly mind, and an angelical beauty, yet thou hast a devilish wit,
It shall be sure to torment thee, Doctor, but do you hear, Doctor? pray present my service to Monsieur Discretion, and tell him, it was a sign he liked not our company, he made so short a stay.
He perceived by your usage of me, that if he stayed, you would beat him out of your company, with your two edged tongues; but I will tell him what a Raillery you are.
I hope you will give me a good report, for I have fully charged you.
You have over-charged me, and therefore it is likely I shall break into exclamations.
Lady, if I may not be your Husband, pray let there be a friendship between us?
What kind of friendship would you make? for there are so many, and of such different natures, as I know not which you would be; as some friendship is made by beauty, some by flattery, some by luxury, some by factions, others by knavery, and all for interest.
None for love?
No, but some are made by lust, but they last not long.
And is there no friendship made by virtue?
O no, for virtue may walk all the World over, and meet never a friend, which is the cause she lives alone; for all the World thinks her too rigid for Society, which makes mankind adhere to her enemy vice.
Doth not marriage make a friendship?
Very seldom, for marriage is like a Common-wealth, which is a contract of bodies, or rather a contract of interest, not a friendship betwixt souls, and there is as much Faction, and oftener civil Wars in marriage, than in public Commonwealths.
I desire our friendship may be Platonic.
That is too dangerous, for it oftimes proves a Traitor to Cha∣steady.
Sir, you must give me leave to chide you, for staying so long with my Nurse-child, as you keep her from her dinner, either go away, or stay and dine with her.
Good Nurse, be patient, for though I am engaged to dine with other company; yet her discourse is such charming music, as I have not power to go from her, as yet.
If my discourse sounds musical, it is only when you are by, but when you are absent, the strings of my voice, or speech, is as if they were bro∣ken, for then my tongue is out of Tune, and my wit is out of humour.
My dearest and sweetest Mistress, may your merits be rewar∣ded
by Fame, your virtue by Heaven, your life by Nature, and all your earthly desires by Fortune.
And my love by the return of yours:
When I forsake you, may Hell take my soul, and Devils tor∣meant it for ingratitude and perjury.
Madamosel Doltche seems to be a very fine, sweet Lady, well-behav'd, sober, modest, discreet, and of a gentle nature.
Most commonly, every one seems best at the first sight, by reason they put on their civilised demeanours, gracefullest garbs, modestest count∣nonce, and speaks their most choicest phrases, or words, when they meet strangers; all which, makes them appear to their advantage, when after ac∣quantaince, they will seem but vulgar, as when they are used to their ordina∣rye garbs, countenances and phrases, and that their natures and dispositions were known, they will appear to be no better than their Neighbours; nay, perchance not so good; the like will Madamosel Doltche appear to you.
I do suppose she looks more familiar on her acquaintance, than strangers, and it is likely, she looks more grave, and sober on strangers, than on her known friends, and familiars; yet those several looks and countenan∣ces, may be as pleasing, and obliging, the one, as the other; for though the one may be more kind, the other may be more respectful; for every ones countenance and behaviour, is to be ordered according to the several degrees or relations of several persons, and to several persons, and to several sexes, or according to their condition, state, life and fortune, and according to the times and occasions; for women are, or should be, more free and confident to, and in the company of women, than men; and men are more respect∣full in their discourse and behaviour to women, than to their own Sex, and a merry countenance in a sad condition or state of life or fortunes, would not be seemly; mirth in the house of mourning, would be inhumane, or to dance or sing over the Graves of their Parents, Children, Husbands, Wives or Friends, would be unnatural, or to be merry in the time of a general calami∣tie, as in timate of VVars, Plagues, or Pamine, or Deluges, or to be sad or froward in a general rejoicing; but a sad countenance, and a grave behaviour, is as sitting, and seems comely and handsome in a time of calamity, as a merry countenance, and a dancing behaviour, in a time of rejoicing; for tears becomes the face, sometimes, as well as smiles, and blushing may ap∣pear and express a modest nature to strangers, when to familiar acquaintance∣tenses, blushing might be thought an accuser, or witness of some crime, yet bashful eyes at all times, becomes modest Virgins.
I hate bashful eyes, for they are like to troubled waters, thick and unsteady, rolling from place to place, without an assurance; for modest Virgins may look upon the World with a confident brow, if they have no guilt to stain their cheeks with blushes, and surely amongst well-brod persons,
there is none so rude, injurious, or uncivil, to force the blood to rise, or stop the light, in causing bashful eyes, but such as condemns a confident count∣nonce in Virgins faces; my eye of understanding will cast a despising glance on such ridiculous fools, and the tongue of reason condemns them.
I wonder, Daughter, you should be so rudely uncivil to Monsieur Generosity, to use him so unkindly, as to entertain him with scornful words, and disrespectful behaviour.
Why did he come to visit me?
To offer his service, and to profess his affection to your person and virtue.
I care not for his service, or affection.
But he is a person of an honourable Title, and can make you a great Lady.
Give me leave to tell you, Mother, that nature hath given me Ti∣tles of Honour, Wit and Beauty, to which all men will bow to, with re∣spect; Titles from Kings, poor petty things to those.
But Daughter, let me tell you, that wit and beauty, without mo∣desty, civility and virtuous curtsy, may ensnare facile fools, and allure fond persons, but not persuade the judicious to esteem you, nor the constant to sue to you, nor true love to desire you; you may have vain Boasters, and amotous Flatterers to court you; but none that is wise, or honourable, will marry you, and to use this Noble Lord so disrespectfully, who is endued with virtue, and adorned with the graces, and beloved of the Muses, is a crime unpardonable.
Mother, the Muses and the Graces are Witches, which enchants the soul, and charms the Spirits, and makes the Senses extravagant, and the actions desperate.
Methinks they should charm you; if they have such power.
My humour is a Spell against all such charms.
You are well met, for I was going to your lodging to see you.
And I am now going home, and therefore let us go toge∣there.
Where have you been?
At a house you often resort to.
What, at a Bawdy-house?
Yes.
Why, how durst you venture?
Why?
Why! why if your angelical Mistress should come to hear of it; Faith, she would bury your heart again.
Yes, is it were not out of her power.
Why, hath she not the Possession?
No saith.
How comes that to pass?
I know not how, but upon some dislike, it grew weary, and by some opportunity, it found it stole home, and since it hath promised never to leave me again; for it hath confessed to me, it hath been most miserably tor∣mented with doubts, fears, jealousies and despairs.
Prithee let me tell thee, as a friend, that thy heart, is a false lie∣ing heart, for there inhabits no torments amongst angelical bodies.
By your favour, in Plutoes Court, there be Angels as well, and as many as in Ioves; But let me tell you, that if I did not love you very well, I would call you to an account, for calling my heart, a false lying heart.
Prithee pacify thy self, for I am sure I have had but a heartless friend of thee, all the time of thy hearts absence, and if I should rail of thy heart, thou hast no reason to condemn me; but prithee, tell me, had not thy heart some pleasure sometimes to mitigate the torments?
No saith, for my heart tells me, that what with rigid virtue, cruel scorn, and insulting pride, it never had a minutes pleasure, nor so much as a moment of ease; and if that there were no more hopes of happiness amongst the Gods in Heaven, than there is amongst the Goddesses on Earth, it would never desire to go to them, or dwell amongst them: Nay, my heart says, it should be as much afraid to go to Heaven, and to be with the Gods, as mortals are to go to Hell, to be with Devils.
But if pleasure, and happiness, is not to be found with virtue, nor with the Gods, where shall we seek for it.
I will tell you what my heart saith, and doth assure me; that is, that pleasure lives always with vice, and that good fellowship is amongst the damned, and it doth swear, it is a most melancholy life, to live with those that are called the blessed, which are the Goddesses on Earth.
Why, then let us return to the house from whence you came.
No faith, I am dry, wherefore I will go to a Tavern.
Content.
Which shall I complain of? Nature or Education; I am compassionate by nature; for though I am froward, I am not crew∣el, I am pious by education; for though I am froward, I am not wicked, I am virtuous by nature, and education; for though I am froward, I am neither dishonest, unchaste, base, or unworthy: Why then, it is Fortune I must complain of, for Fortune hath given me plenty, and plenty hath made me proud, and pride hath made me self-conceited, self-conceit hath bred disdain, and disdain scorn; So pride, disdain, and scorn, makes me disap∣prove all other creatures actions, or opinions, but my own; and this disap∣proving is that which men calls cross, peevish, and froward disposition, being most commonly, accompanied with sharp satirical words, and angry frowns.
These faults i'll conquer, whereresoere they lye;
I'll rule my froward humour, or i'll dye.
Lord! Lord! I wonder men and women should spend their time so idly, and wast their lives so vainly, in talking so ignorantly, and acting so foolishly upon the great Stage, or the Stage of the great World.
Why, how would you have them spend their time, or talk, or act?
I would have them spend their time, to gain time, as to prevent or hinder times oblivion, and to speak and act to that design,
—That when their bodies dye,
Their Names and Fems, may live eternally.
But it is not in every mans, or women's power, to get same, for some are made incapable by nature, others are hindered by fortune, some are obstructed by chance, others want time and opportunity, wealth, birth and education, and many that are pulled back by envy, spite and malice.
What man or woman soever, that nature is liberal to, may eter∣nalize themselves; as for fortune, she may hinder the active, the like may chance, envy, spite and malice, but cannot hinder the contemplative; the like may time and opportunity; but poor poverty and birth, can be no hen∣drance to natural wit, for natural wit, in a poor Cottage, may spin an after∣life, enter-weaving several coloured fancies, and threads of opinions, making fine and curious Tapestries to hang in the Chambers of fame, or wit may
and carve Images of imaginations, to place and set forth the Gardens of fame, making fountains of Poetry, that may run in smooth streams of verse, or wit may paint and pencil out some Copies, and various Pictures of Na∣ture, with the pencils of Rhetoric on the grounds of Philosophy, to hang in the Galleries of fame; Thus the Palacesses of fame may be furnished and adorned by the wit of a poor Cottager.
Item, I am to be courteous, but not familiar; to be merry, but not wild; to be kind, but not wanton, to be friendly, but not intimate; to be sociable, but not troublesome; to be conversable, but not talkative; to look soberly, but not frowningly; to return answers civilly, to ask questions wisely, to demand rights honestly, to argue rationally, and to maintain open∣nions probably: These rules I will strictly observe, and constantly practice.
Sir, I cry peccavi, and ask your pardon, for speaking so unhand∣somely of the effeminate Sex, when I was last in your company; for my in∣discretion made me forget, so as not to remember, that all men hath either VVives, Sisters, Daughters or Mothers: But truly, my discourse proceeded neither from spite or malice, but from the consideration of my own faults, which being so many, did bury the good graces of other women, for though I am virtuously honest, yet I am but rudely fashioned, and untoward for conversation; but though my discourse had a triangular countenance, for it seemed foolish, spy•efull and wicked; yet pray, Sir, believe, the natural face, was a perfect, round, honest face.
Lady, what faults soever, your Sex is guilty of, your virtues will get their pardon, and your beauty will cover their blemishes.
I wish my indiscretion had not discovered my froward imperfect∣once, but I am sorry, and shall hereafter endeavour to rectify my errors.
Good Nurse, where is my virtuous, sweet Mistress?
In her chamber, Sir.
What is she doing?
She is reading.
What Books doth she read? are they Divinity, Morality, Philosophy, History or Poetry?
Sometimes her study is of one, and then of another; But now I think, her chief study, is you, wherein she may read humanity.
Lord child! what makes you blush?
Not crimes, but my blushing, is caused by a sudden assault, or surprise meeting him; I did not expect to meet at this time, which raised up blushes in my face; for blushing is like the full and falling tide; for the blood flows to the face, and from thence ebbes to the heart, as passions moves the mind;
And thoughts as waves, in curling folds do rise,
And lashfull eyes, are like the troubled skies.
Sweet Mistress, crimes cannot stain your cheeks with blushes, but modesty hath penseld Roses there, which seems as sweet, as they look fair.
I desire my looks and countenance, may always appear so, as they may never falsely accuse me; and as I would not have my looks, or count∣nonce, wrong my innocence, or deceive the Spectators, so I would not have my heart be ungrateful to bury your presence in silence; Wherefore, I give you thanks, Sir, for the noble Present you sent me to day.
I was afraid you would not have accepted of it.
Truly, I shall refuse no Present you shall send me, although it were ushered with scorn, and attended with death.
My kind Mistress, I shall never send you any Present, but what is ushered by my love, attended by my service, and presented with the offer of my life.
Child, you are very free of kind words.
And my deeds shall answer my words, is need requires; yet I am sorry if my speaking over-much, should offend; but I chose rather, to set bosses of words on the sense of my discourse, although it obscures the gloss of my speech, than my love should be buried in my silence.
Sweet Mistress, your loving expressions gives such joy unto my heart, and such delight unto my hearing, as my soul is enthroned in hap∣pines, and crowned with tranquillity.
Pray Heaven, you both may be as full of Love, Joy and Peace, when you are married, as you express to have now; But let me tell you, young Lovers, that Hymen is a very temperate, and discreet Gentleman in love, I will assure you; neither doth he express himself in such high poe∣tical Raptures, for his discourse is plain, and ordinary.
Nay, sometimes his discourse is extraordinary, as when he hath Wars; but Nurse, thou art old, and the fire of love, if ever thou had any, is put out by old Father Times extinguisher.
True love never dyes, nor can time put it out.
It is true, but Nurse seems by her speech, as if she had never known true love; for true love, as it always burns clear, so it always flames high, far infinite is the fuel that feeds it.
Well, well? young Lovers, be not so confident, but let me advise
you to balance reason on both sides, with hopes, and doubts, and then the judgement will be steady.
But in the scales of love, Nurse, nothing must be but confi∣dence.
Yes, there must be temperance, or love will surfeit, and dye with excess.
Love cannot surfeit, no more than souls with grace, or Saints of Heaven.
My smiles shall be as Baits, my eyes as Angels, where every look shall be a hook to catch a heart; I'll teach my tongue such art, to plant words on each heart, as they shall take deep root, from whence pure love shall spring; my lips shall be as flowery banks, whereon sweet Rhetoric grows, and cipherous fancy blows; from which banks, love shall wish to gather Posies of kisses, where every single kiss shall differ as Roses, Pinks, Violets, Primroses, and Daffidillies, and the breath therefrom, shall be as fragant as the touch, soft thereon, and as the Sun doth heat the Earth, so shall my embraces heat my Lovers thoughts with self-conceit, which were before like water, frozen with a dejected and despairing cold. Hay ho!
Dear Mistress, you are the only She that is fit to be crowned; the sole Empress of the World.
Let me tell you, Sir? I had rather be a single Shepherdess, than the sole Empress of the World; for I would not be a Mistress of so much power, to be as a Servant to so much trouble.
But, put the case Alexander were alive, and would crown you Empress of the World, you would not refuse that honour, but accept of it, for the sake of renown.
Yes, I should refuse it, for if I could not get renown by my own merits, I should wish to dye in Oblivion, for I care not; Nay, I despise such
honours and renowns, as comes by derivations, as being derived from another, and not inherent in my self, and it is a poor, and mean renown, that is gained or got, only by receiving a gift from a fellow-creature, who gives out of pas∣zion, appetite, partiality, vain-glory, or fear, and not for merit or worth∣sake; wherefore, no gifts but those that comes from the Gods, or Nature, are to be esteemed, or received with thanks, but were to be refused, had man the power to chose, or to deny.
Sweet Mistress, nature hath crowned you with beauty and wit, and the Gods hath given you a noble soul.
I wish they had, for the Gods gifts are not like to mans, and natures crown is beyond the golden crown of Art, which are greater glories, than Power, Wealth, Title or Birth, or all the outward honours gained on Earth; but I desire the Gods may crown my soul with reason and understanding; Heaven crown my mind with Temperance and Fortitude; Nature crown my body with Health and Strength, time crown my life with comely and discreet age; Death crown my separation with peace and rest; and Fame crown my memory with an everlasting renown; thus may my creation be to a happy end.
Gods, Fortune and Fates hath joined to make me happy in your love, and that which will make me absolutely happy, is, that I shall marry you, and embrace you as my wife.
The absolute happiness is, when the Gods embraces man with mer∣cy, and kisses him with love.
Hay, ho! who can love, and be wise? but why do I say so? For reason loves wisely; it is only the mistaken senses that loves foolishly; indeed, the sense doth not love, but sondly, and foolishly affects, for it, it is an humoursome and inconstant appetite that proceeds from the body, and not that noble passion of true love which proceeds from the soul: But O! what a ridiculous humour am I fallen into, from a choleric humour, into an amorous humour; Oh! I could tear my soul from my body, for having such whining thoughts, and such a mean, submissive, croaching, feigning, flattering humour, and idle mind; a choleric humour, is noble to this, for it is commanding, and seems of an heroic spirit, but to be amorous, is base, beastly, and of an inconstant nature.
Oh! How apt is busy life to go amiss,
What foolish humours in mans mind there is:
But O! The soul is far beyond the mind,
As much as man is from the beastly kind.
Are you weary of, your life? that you send me; for you said, you would not send for me, until you had a desire to dye.
True, Doctor, and if you cannot cure me, kill me.
In my conscience, you have sent for me to play the wanton.
Why, Doctor? If I do not infringe the rules and laws of mo∣desty, or civility, I cannot commit wanton faults,
Yes faith, your tongue may play the wanton,
Indeed, Doctor, I had rather tell a wanton truth, than a mo∣dest lye.
Well, what is your disease?
Nay, that you must guess, I can only tell my pains.
Where is your pain?
In my heart and head.
Those be dangerous parts, but after what manner are your pains?
On my heart there lies a weight, as heavy as the World on Atlas shoulders; and from my melancholy mind, arises such damps of doubts, as almost quenches out the fire of life, did not some hope, though weak, which blows with fainting breath, keep it alive, or rather puffs than blows, which intermitting motions, makes my pulse unequal, and my blood to ebb and flow, as from my heart, unto my face; and from my face, unto my heart again; as for my head, it feels drowsy, and my spirits are dull; my thoughts uneasily doth run, crossing, and striving to throw each other down; this causes broken sleeps, and frightful dreams, and when I awake at every noise, I start with fears, my limbs doth shake.
Why, this disease is love, wherefore I cannot cure you; for love no more than wit, can neither be tempered, nor yet be ruled, for love and wit, keeps neither moderate bounds, nor spares diet, but dyes most commonly of a surfeit.
O yes, discretion can cure both.
Then send for Monsieur Discretion, and hear what he says to you, for your disease is past my skill.
By your industry, Doctor, help may be found, in giving direct∣once, and ordering the cordial.
So I understand you would have my counsel what you should do, and my industry to order, and get a meeting between Monsieur Discretion and you, and to make the match betwixt you.
You understand me right.
Well, I will study the means, and try if I can procure thee a man.
Good fortune be your guide.
And Monsieur Discretion, your Husband,
Thoughts be at rest, for since my love is honest, and the person I love worthy, I may love honourably, for he is not only learned with study, experienced with time and practice, but he is natures favourite, she hath endued his soul with uncontrolled reason, his mind with noble thoughts, his heart with heroic generosity, and his brain with a supreme wit; Besides, she hath presented his judgement and understanding, with such a clear Pro∣spective-glasse of speculations, and such a Multiplying-glass of conception, as he sees farther, and discerns more into natures works, than any man she hath made before him.
But let me consider? I have used this worthy Gentleman uncivilly, nay rudely, I have despised him; wherefore he cannot love me, for nature ab∣horse neglect, and if he cannot love me in honesty, he ought not to marry me, and if I be not his wife, for certain I shall dye for love, or live a most un∣happy life, which is far worse than death. Hay ho!
What, Daughter, sick with love?
O, Mother? love is a Tyrant, which never lets the mind be at rest, and the thoughts are the torments, and when the mind is tormented, the by∣die is seldom in health.
Well, to ease you, I will go to this Lord Generosity, and pray him to give you a visit.
By no means, Mother, for I had rather dye with love, than live to be despised with scorn, for he will refuse your desires, or if he should come, it would be but to express his hate, or proudly triumph on my unhappy state.
She is most desperately in love, but I will endeavour to settle her mind.
Am not I a good Doctor now, that hath got you a good Hus∣band?
Nay, Doctor, he is but a Suitor, as yet.
Why do not you woe upon the Stage, as the rest of your Como∣rades doth?
O fie, Doctor Discretion never whines our love in public.
So you love to be in private?
Why, Doctor, the purest love is most concealed, it lies in the heart; and it warms it self by its own fire.
Take heed, for if you keep it too tenderly, and close, it may chance to catch cold when it comes abroad.
True love ought to keep home, and not to gossip abroad.
Madam Monsieur Discretion is come to visit you.
Come, Doctor, be a witness of our contract?
I had rather stay with your maid.
She hath not wit to entertain you.
Nor none to anger me.
Pray come away, for no wise man is angry with wit.
I perceive, if I do not go with you, that you will call me fool.
Comorade, what cause makes you so fine to day?
I am going to two weddings to day.
Faith, one had been enough; but how can you divide yourself betwixt two Bridals?
I shall not need to divide my self, since the Bridals keeps toge∣there; for they are married both in one Church, and by one Priest, and they feast in one house.
And will they lye in one bed?
No surely, they will have two beds, for fear each Bride-groom should mistake his Bride.
Well, I wish the Bride-grooms, and their Brides joy, and their Guests, good cheer.
Will not you be one of the Guests?
No, for a Bon Compaignon shuns Hymens Court, neither will Hymen entertain him: But who are the Brides and Bride-grooms?
Monsieur Nobilissimo, and Madamosel Doltche, and Monsieur Perfection; and Madamosel Solid.
Is Monsieur Profession a Guest there.
No, for he swears now, that he hates marriage, as he hates death.
But he loves a Mistress, as he loves life.
Lady, why do you shun my company, in going from me, praystay, and give my visit a civil entertainment; for though I am not worthy of your affection, yet my love deserves you civility.
I know you are come to laugh at me, which is ignobly done; for heroic, generous spirits, doth not triumph on the weak effeminate Sex.
Pray believe I am a Gentleman, for if I loved you not, yet I would never be rude, to be uncivil to you, or your Sex; But I love you so well, as when I leave to serve you with my life, may nature leave to nourish me, fortune leave to favour me, and Heaven leave to bless me, and then let death cast me into Hell, there to be tormented.
I am more obliged to your generous affections, than to my own merits.
The ill opinion of your self doth not lessen your virtues, and if you think me worthy to be your Husband, and will agree, we will go strait to Church, and be married.
I shall not refuse you.

THE Poetress says, that if the Play be bad,
She's very sorry, and could wish she had
A better plot, more wit and skill to make
A Play that might each several humour take;
But she says, if your humours are not fixed,
Or that they are extravagantly mixed;
Impossible a Play for to present
With such variety, and temperiment;
But some will think it tedious, or find fault,
Say the Design or Language is stark nought;
Besides, the loose unsettled brains, she fears
Sees with squint eyes, and hears with Asses ears;
But she is confident all in this round,
Their understandings clear, and judgements sound;
And if her Play deserves not praise, she knows
They'll neither scoff in words, nor preposterous shows:
Without disturbance, you will let it dye,
And in the Grave of silence let it lye.
Husband, you have a strange nature, that ha∣avenge but one child, and never like to have more, and this your child a daughter; that you should breed her so strictly, as to give her no time for recreation, nor no li∣bertie for company, nor freedom for conversation, but keeps her as a Prisoner, and makes her a slave to her book, and your tedious moral discourses, when other children have Play-fellows, and toys to sport and pass their time withal.
Good wife be content, doth not she play when she reads books of Poetry, and can there be nobler, amiabler, finer, usefuller, and wi∣ser companions than the Sciences, or pleasanter Play-fellows than the Muses; can she have freer conversation, than with wit, or more various recreations than Scenes, Sonnets and Poems; Tragical, Comical, and Musical, and the like; Or have prettier toys to sport withal, than fancy, and hath not the liberty so many hours in the day, as children have to play in.
Do you call this playing? which sets her brain a worcester∣king to find out the conceits, when perchance there is none to find out, but are cheats, and cozens the Readers with empty words, at best, it sills her head but with strange phantasms, disturbs her sleep with frightful dreams of transformed bodies of Monsters, and ugly shaped vices of Hells and Furies, and terrifying Gods of Wars and Battles, of long travels, and dangerous escapes, and the pleasantest is but dark groves, gloomy fields, and the hap∣piest condition; but to walk idly about the Elizium fields; and thus you breed your daughter, as if your Posterity were to be raised from a Poets fantastical brain.
I wish my Posterity may last but as long as Homers lines.
Truly, it will be a fine airey brood! No no, I will have her bred, as to make a good housewife, as to know how to order her Family, breed her Children, govern her Servants, entertain her Neighbours, and to fashion herself to all companies, times and places, and not to be mewed and moped up, as she is from all the World, insomuch, as she never saw twen∣tie persons in one company in all her life, unless it be in pictures, which you set her to stare on above an hour everyday: Besides, what Father doth adieu∣cate their Daughters, that office belongs to me; but because you have no∣ver a Son to tutor, therefore you will turn Cotqucan, and teach your daugh∣la, which is my work.
Let me tell you, Wife, that is the reason all women are fools; for women breeding up women, one fool breeding up another, and as long as that custom lasts there is no hopes of amendment, and ancient cu∣stoms
being a second nature, makes folly hereditary in that Sex, by reason their education is effeminate, and their times spent in pins, points and laces, their study only vain fashions, which breeds prodigality, pride and en∣vie.
What? would you have women bred up to swear, swag∣ger, gaming, drinking, Whoring, as most men are?
No, Wife, I would have them bred in learned Schools, to noble Arts and Sciences, as wise men are.
What Arts? to ride Horses, and fight Dewels.
Yes, if it be to defend their Honour, Country and Reli∣gion; For noble Arts makes not base Vices, nor is the cause of lewd actions, nor is unseemly for any Sex; but baseness, vice and lewdness, invents un∣handsome and indecent Arts, which dishonours by the practice either Sex.
Come, come, Husband, I will have her bred, as usually our Sex is, and not after a new fashioned way, created out of a self-opiniated, that you can alter nature by education: No, no, let me tell you, a woman will be a woman, do what you can, and you may as soon create a new World, as change a women's nature and disposition.
O, Father! I have been in search of you, to ask you a que∣stion concerning the Sun.
What have you to do with the Sun, and lives in the shade of the Worlds obscurity.
Why, Madam? where would you have me live? can I live in a more serene air, than in my Fathers house, or in a purer, or clearer light, than in my Parents eyes, or more splendrous, than in my Parents com∣pany.
I would have you live at Court there, to have honour, favour and grace; and not to lose your time ignorantly, knowing nothing of the World, nor the World of you.
Can I live with more honour, than with my Father, and You, or have more favour than your loves; or is there a greater grace, than to be Daughter of virtuous Parents; can I use, or employ my time better, than to obey my Parents commands? need I know more than honesty, modesty, ci∣vility and duty: As for the World, mankind is so partial to each self, as they have no faith on the worth of their Neighbour, neither doth they take no∣tice of a Stranger, but to be taken notice of.
Yes, yes, your beauty will attract eyes and ears, which are the doors to let in good opinion, and admiration.
Had I a tongue like a Cerces-wand to charm all ears that heard me, it would staight transform men from civil Obligers, to spiteful Detractors, or false Slanderers; my beauty may only serve but as a bribe to tempt men, to entrap my youth, and to betray my innocence.
To betray a fools-head of your own! Lord! Lord! how the
dispositions of Youth is changed since I was young! for before I came to your Age, I thought my Parents unnatural, because they did not provide me a Husband.
If all youth were of my humour, their dispositions are change∣ed indeed; for Heaven knows, it is the only curse I fear, a Husband.
Why? then you think me cursed in Marrying your Fa∣there.
No Madam, you are blessed, not only in being a Wife, (a condition you desired) but being married to such a man that wishes could not hope for.
Why then, my good Fortune may encourage you, and raise a hope to get the like.
O no! It rather drives me to despair, believing there is no se∣cond.
Come, come, you are an unnatural Child to flatter your Father so much, and not me, when I endured great pains to breed, bear, and nurse you up.
I do not flatter, Madam, for I speak nothing but my thoughts, and that which Love and duty doth allow, and truth approve of.
Come, come Wife, the Jeerals wit will out-argue both ours.
Have I left my Husband, who was rich, and used me well? and all for love of you! and with you live as a Wanton! by which I have lost my esteem, and my honest reputation, and now to be for∣saken, and cast aside, despised and scorned! O, most base! for what can be more unworthy, than for a man to profess friendship to a Lady, and then forsake her?
Madam, you do me wrong, for my heart is as firmly yours, as ever it was, and burns with as clear a flame, as ever it did.
It is not like it will continue so, since you now are recall∣ved to marry.
The reasons are so powerful, that persuades me, by rea∣son there is none lest of my Family besides my self; and my Fathers com∣mands so terrifying, and my vows so binding, as I know not how to avoid it.
But since your Father is dead, what need you fear his commands, and for your vows, those may be dispensed with, for a sum of money to the Church for the poor.
But would you have me cut off the line of my Post∣rity by never marrying?
Perchance, if you marry, you may have no children, or your wife may prove barren, or if you have children, they may prove fools; for she you are affianced to, is none of the wisest.
That is none of my fault.
But why will you marry so soon?
I will not marry yet, for my affianced is young, and well may stay two or three years.
But if you will not marry her this two or three years, why must she come to live with you in your house.
By reason her Father is newly dead, and hath left her to my protection, as having right to her, and by her, to her estate.
And when she comes, I must deliver up the rule and government of your house and Family to her; for I suppose you will make her the Mistress to command, dispose and order as she pleases.
By no means, for you that are the Mistress of my heart, shall also be Mistress of my Estate.
Then pray give her to my charge and education; for I hear she is of a high spirit, and a proud heart, being spoiled with self-will, given her by the fondness of her Father.
Pray order her as you think good, she shall be your hand-maid.
Here flows a Sea, and there a sire doth flame,
Yet water and fire still is but the same:
Here the sixth earth, and there the air streams out,
All of one matter moving round about;
And thus the earth, and water, sire and air,
Out of each others shapes transformed are.
I am sure you are transformed from what you should be, from a sober, young maid, to a Stage-player, as to act Parts, speak Speeches, rehearse Verses, sing Sonnets, and the like,
Why, Madam; Stages and public Theaters, were first ordained and built, for the education of noble youth, where they might meet to pra∣ctise how to behave themselves civilly, modestly, gently, comely, gracefully, manly, and majestically; to speak properly, timely, fitly, eloquently, eel∣gently, tunably, tonably, readily, sagely, wittily. Besides, Theators were not only Schools to learn or practise in, but public patterns to take example from; Thus Theaters were profitable, both to the Actors and Spectators; for as these Theaters were public Schools, where noble principles were taught, so it was the dressing rooms of virtue, where the Actors, as her Ser∣vents did help to set her forth. Also these Theaters were as Scaffolds, where∣on vices were publicly executed; and, Madam, if you please but to consi∣der,
you will perceive, that Thrones are but glorious Theaters, where Kings and Princes, and their Courtiers acts their parts; likewise places of Judica∣ture, are but places where Judges and Lawyers acts their parts; Nay, even Churches are but holy Theaters, where the Priest and People acts their de∣vote parts. But, Madam, you mistake, making no difference betwixt the noble and base, the generous and mercenary; for, shall all noble persons that fights dewels of honour, be called Fencers; or shall a King, when he runs at the Ring, or Tilt, shall he be called a Jockey, or Post, when he rides whore∣ses of Manage, shall he be a Quirry, or a Rider; or shall Kings, Princes or noble Persons, that dances, sings, or plays on Music, or presents themselves in Masks, be thought, or called Dancers, or Fiddlers, Morris-dancers, Stage-players, or the like, as in their masking attire: No those are Riders, Fencers, Dancers, Fiddlers, Stage-players, and the like, that are mercenary, setting Ver∣tuosus to sale, making a mercenary profit, and living thereof; but if such open∣nions should be held, then no Vertuosus should be learned of noble Persons, because there are mercenary Tutors and Teachers, nor no arts understood, because of Mechanics, nor no Sciences understood, because of Pedants, nor no manners, nor graceful behaviours practised because of Players, nor none must write, because of Clerks, nor none must pray because of beneficed Priests, nor there must none understand the Laws, or plead their own causes, because of feed Lawyers; if these opinions or rules were followed, all the nobler and better sort, would be boars, clowns and fools, nor no civility, good manners, nor virtues would be known amongst them.
Well, well, I will have you show your self, and be known, and I known by you; for why should not I be as ambitious to be praised in your beauty, as your Father in your wit; but by that time you have gotten a suffi∣cient stock of wit to divulge to the World, your beauty will be dead and buried, and so my ruins will have no restoration, or resurrection.
Madam, I do humbly and dutifully acknowledge, that what beau∣tie or wit I have, it was derived from my Parents.
Wherefore you ought to do, as your Parents will have you, and I say, I will have you be a Courtier.
Would you have me go to live at the Court, Madam?
Yes marry would I.
And to do as Courtiers do?
Yes marry would I.
Alas, Madam, I am unpractised in their arts, and shall be lost in their subtle and strange ways.
Therefore I would have you go to learn them, that you may be as expert as the best of them, for I would have you shoot such sharp darts thorough your eyes, as may wound the hardest and obduratest hearts.
Amorous affections, Madam, and wanton glances are strangers to my eyes and heart; neither can I persuade nor command them to be other∣wise than they are.
Why, I would not have you either wanton, or amorous, but to be kind and civil, to invite a rich, noble Husband.
Why, say I had the power to pick and choose amongst the noblest and the richest men, a Husband out, you cannot promise me a happy life, fortune may set a Crown of Diamonds on my head, yet prick my heart with thorns, bind up my spirits with strong chained fears, my thoughts imprisoned in dark melancholy, and thus my mind may prove
a Hell unto my life, and my Husbands actions devils to torment it.
No disputing, but let my will be obeyed.
It is fit it should be by me, although it brings my ruin.
Joy gave me wings, and made my spirits fly,
Hope gave me strength to set ambition high;
Fear makes me old, as palsy shakes each limb,
My body weak, and both my eyes are dimb:
Like to a Ball, which rackets beats about,
So is my heart stricken twixt hope and doubt.
I observe, the Lord de L'amour uses the Lady Inno∣cence with more respect than he was used to do; and I observe his eyes meets her when she comes in place where he is, and follows her whereso∣ever she goes, and when she stands still, they are sixth upon her.
Truly she hath power, if she will put it in force to command a heart, at least to persuade a heart to love her; for certainly, she is very beau∣tifull, if it were not obscured under a sad countenance, as the Sun behind a dark cloud; but sometimes, do what she can in despite of her sadness, it will keep out, and the other day when you were gone abroad, I saw her dance, sing and play on a Gittur•, all at one time.
And how did it become her?
Truly, she sung so sweetly, played so harmoniously, danced so gracefully, and looked so beautifully, that if I had been a man, I should have been in love with her.
I charge you break her Gittar, tell her she sings not well, and that her dancing doth ill-become her.
Perchance she will not believe me.
Oh yes, for youth are credulous, even against them∣selves.
Ambitious thoughts flies high, yet never tires,
Winged with the swiftest thoughts of desires;
Then thoughts of hopes runs busily about,
Yet oft are stopped with thoughts of fear and doubt,
And thoughts of mirth and melancholy strives,
All thoughts are restless till the body dyes.
My child, it is a sign you are melancholy, that you are in a poetical vain.
Why do you weep?
Melancholy thoughts makes tears to flow thorough my eyes.
Melancholy! why, thou art not come to the years of melan∣cholly; it is aged brows on which sad Saturn sets, and tired thoughts on which he reigns, and on grieved heart his heavy taxes lays; but those that are young, he leaves to other powers, neither hath fortune set her turning foot upon thy head, for thou art in the same worldly condition that thou were born to; wherefore thy mind may be quiet, and thy thoughts merry and free.
Surely, sir, it is not always age, nor yet cross fortunes that clouds the mind, for some are old and mean, poor and despised, yet merry, and hue∣morse gay, and some are young and fairer, and rich, and well esteemed, ho∣noured and loved, and yet their thoughts dejectedly doth move, and humour dull as lead; it is nature makes melancholy, neither age nor evil fortune brings it.
But what makes thee sad, my child?
Ambition, Sir.
What doth your ambition aim at? If it be honour, I have an E∣state will buy thee an honourable Husband; if it be riches, I will be saving, and live thriftily, if it be gallantry, or bravery, I will maintain thee at the hight of my fortune, wear Frieze my self, and adorn thee in Diamonds, Silver and Gold.
Heaven forbid! that my vanity should prodigally spend your Estate, or my covetousness pinch and starve your Life, or that my pride should be matched with noble honour, which should be as humble as great.
It cannot be for wit and beauty, for, surely nature hath made her self poor, by giving you so much.
My dear Father, know it is fame I covet, for which were the am∣bitions of Alexander and Caesar joined into one mind, mine doth exceed them, as far as theirs exceeded humble spirits, my mind being restless to get the highest place in Fems high Tower; and I had rather fall in the adventure, than never try to climb; wherefore, it is not titled Honour, nor Wealth, nor Bravery, nor Beauty, nor Wit that I covet, but as they do contribute to adorn merit, which merit is the only foundation whereon is built a glorious fame, where noble actions is the architectour thereof, which makes me de∣spairingly melancholy, having not a sufficient stock of merit, or if I had, yet no ways to advance it; but I must dye like beasts, forgotten of mankind, and be buried in Oblivions grave.
If it be fame my child covets, it is a noble ambition; and Heaven pardon me, if I speak vain-gloriously of what is my own, yet I speak but my opinion, when I say, I do believe there is none so fit to raise a fame, as thou art.
Sir, your love speaks, as willing to encourage me; but know Sir; it is not a vulgar fame I covet, for those that goes with equal space, and even heights, are soon lost, as in a crowd or multitude; but when fame is enthroned, all Ages gazes at it; and being thus supremely placed up high; Like as an Idol, gets Idolatry: Thus singularity as well as merit, advances fame.
Child, thou speak always reason, and were my life the only singular way to raise thy fame, thou should have it.
Heaven forbid! For that would raise my infamy, if I should build upon my Fathers noble life. But, Sir, do you love me?
Yes, above my life! for thou art the life of my life!
Do you love me as well as you think you could your Grand-chil∣drone?
No comparison can be made, for thou art come immediately from my loins, those but from the Joins of my Issue, which is estranged from me, and for their affections, Grand-childrens is but weak, only they keep alive my name, not love, for that dyes in the second descent, and many times the first.
But, Sir; would not you think me strangely unnatural, and unwor∣thy of your love, to wish or desire you to break the line of your Posterity, and bury succession in my grave?
Unnatural! no, for your virtue can ask nothing of me, that my love will think unreasonable to give, and for my Posterity, I had rather it should end with merit, than run on in follies; or who knows but their evil or base actions may blemish all their Predecessors; besides, it is with success∣zion, as with a married pair; for if the wife be chaste, the World will give the honour only to the woman, but if she be false, the World will lay the disgrace on the Husband, and think she sees some defect, which makes her prefer another before him. So in succession, if their succession proves fools, cowards, avaricious, treacherous, vicious, or the like, the World straight judges these imperfections and vices were in hereditary, and that they were attained, or stained from the root or stock, but if they prove wise, valiant, generous, just, or the like, they think they were particular gifts of nature, or education, thus the faults of succession many descents after, may darken like black clouds, the bright light of their Predecessors worth and merit; Besides, there is no certainty of a continued line, nor doth many children give an assurance to their Father at the day of his death; for when he dyes, doubts closes his
eyes, and fears blows out lifes fire, therefore I had rather live in thy fame, than live or dye in an infamous and foolish succession.
Heaven make me thankful that my desires and my fathers ap∣provement agrees. Sir, you have not only bred me with a tender love, but with a prudent Industry. And I have followed your instruction with a Reli∣gious Ceremony. Kept to your principles with a pious Conscience, and since nature and education hath joined together in my tender years, to make my life propitious; If fortune favour me, and opportunity promote me; but we are to consider which way I shall steer the course of my life, and if you will please I will tell you how I have designed my voyage.
Heaven prosper the through it, and send the a safe passage, where∣soever thou adventurest.
Then first, it is to be considered, I am but a small and weak vessel, and cannot swim upon the rough and boisterous Seas, which are pitched fields, and fighting Armies, wherein I shall be shattered in the crowd, and drowned in the confusion of disorder, wherefore I must swim in the calm rivers of peace where their is no such storms, nor high billows, only some cross winds may chance to rise, which may hinder me but not drown me; this calm river is a Theater, and the rough Sea as I said a pitched field; my self the ship, you the steeradg, and fame the port, then thus I will relate how I have designed the voyage of my life; first never to marry, if I may have your consent to live a single life, for that time which will be lost in a married condition, I will study and work with my own thoughts, and what new In∣ventions they can find out, or what probabilities they conceive, or fancies they create, I will publish to the world in print before I make them common by discourse, but if I marry, although I should have time for my thoughts and contemplations, yet perchance my Husband will not approve of my works, were they never so worthy, and by no persuasion, or reason allow of there publishing; as if it were unlawful, or against nature, for Women to have wit. And strives always if their wives have wit, to obscure it. And I am of that opinion, that some men are so inconsiderately wise, gravely fool∣each and lowly base, as they had rather be thought Cuckolds, than their wives should be thought wits, for fear the world should think their wise, the wi∣ser of the two; and that she rules, and governs all the affairs at home; for most men, rather than they will not show their power, and Authority, will appear a Quat-queen, that is an effeminate scold. Secondly, I will not receive, nor give private visits, or entertainments; but from those, and to those, that duty, and gratitude and loyalty enjoyns me; for in private visits, or enter∣tainments, is only so much time stuffed with senseless, vain, idle, light discour∣ses, or flattering compliments, wherein time and life is unprofitably lost. Thirdly, I would never speak but in public, for if nature, and education, have given me wit, I would not willingly bury it in private discourses; be∣sides, private hearers are secret Thieves, and boldly steals, having no witnesses, to betray, or reveal the truth, or divuldge their thefts; and so they will adorn their discourses with my wit, which they steal from me. Fourthly, I will no∣ver speak of any considerable matter, or subject, or of any new conception; but I will have them ready writ to print them, so soon as my discourse of them is past, or else print them before I discourse of them; and afterwards explain them by my tongue, as well as by my pen, least they should mistake the sense of my works, through Ignorance; for those subject; that are only discoursed off, in speech, flies away in words; which vanishes as smoke, or
shadows, and the memory or remembrance of the Author, or Orator, melts away as oil, leaving no sign in present life, or else molders as dust, leaving no Monument to after-posterity, to be known or remembered by; when write∣ing, or printing, fixes it to everlasting time, to the public view of the World; besides, a passing discourse makes the tongue, but as an Almner, to give wit to poor Sharks to feed them; which Sharks eats, without giving praise or thanks, never acknowledging at whose cost they live at: Nay, so unthank∣full they are, that they will belly the Authors and themselves; saying, it was their own; and it is a certain rule, that those Authors they steal most from, they will dispraise, and rale most at: And some are so foolish, and of such short memories, that they will repeat the Authors wit, to the Authors self; and as confident, as it had been created, or invented, out of their own brains. Fifthly, I will select times, for several discourses and subjects, to discourse in public, to several Audiences; to which, you may, if you please, invite the grave and wise, to hear me, and being a woman Orator, the singularity will advance my fame the more; besides, many accidents may we chance to meet, which may prove as steps to ascend, or Mount up. Thus Sir, if you please to approve of my design, I shall follow the means, or ways unto it; if not, I shall submit to what you shall think will be better for me.
I do approve of your design so well, as I cannot but admire it. And I believe the best designer that ever was, never cast such a mould, or laid such a plot, or drew such a draught, to raise a fame on; or to work a fame out.
But Sir, you must arm yourself against all oppositions, and Bara∣codo your ears against all cross perswaders; and muster your forces of hopes, drawing them into a body of confidence, and march with a resolution, either to dye in the adventure, or to triumph with victory, and to live ever∣lastingly, in a glorious fame; for Sir, we shall meet wranglers, and jesters, scorners, and scoffers, disputers, and opposers, contradictors and liars; which envy and malice will bring against us, but consider Sir, that when the foot of fame hath trod upon the tongue of envy, it will be silent.
Never fear me child, if thou faintest not.
I fear not my self, for I have an undoubted faith, that the Child of such a father can neither be a Coward, nor a fool; for from you I receive a value or prize, although of my self I should be worth nothing; and Parents and Children may speak freely their thoughts, let them move which way they will, for Children ought not to conceal them; but if deceit must be used: let it be with strangers not friends.
O Child! thou hast spoke but what I thought on, and the very same I wished; finding thy tongue volable, thy voice tuneable, thy speech eloquent, thy wit quick, thy expressions easy, thy conceits and conceptions new, thy fancies curious and sine, thy Inventions subtle, thy dispositions sweet and gentle, thy behaviour graceful, thy countenance modest, thy per∣son beautiful, thy years young; all this I thought to my self might raise the a Trophy, when a Husband would bury the in his arms; and so thou to become thy own fems Tomb.
Oh! But how shall we pacify my mother, who is resolved not to be quiet, until I go to live at the Court; as likewise to marry.
I have thought of that, and you know that your mother is well bred, a tender mother and a chaste wife; yet she is violent, and is not to be altered from her opinions, humours, and will, till time wearies her out of
them, wherefore we must not oppose her; but rather sooth her in her hue∣more, and for marrying, we will always find some fault in the man, or his E∣state, person or breeding, or his humour; or his wit, prudence, temperance, courage, or conduct, or the like, which we may truly do without dissem∣bling; for I believe there is no man, but that some exceptions may be justly found to speak against him; but you and I will sit in Council about it.
Well met, for if accident had not befriended me, you would not have been so kind as to have met me; for I perceive you stri∣ved to shun me.
The reason is, I was afraid my presence would not be acceptable.
You never stay to try whether it would or not, but surely if your conversation be answerable to your beauty, your Company cannot but be pleasing.
I doubt I am to young to be handsome, for time hath not shaped me yet into a perfect form, for nature hath but laid the draught, &amp; mixed the colours, for time to work with, which he as yet hath neither placed, nor drawn them right, so that beauty in me is not as yet fully finished; and as my beauty, so I doubt my wit, is imperfect, and the ignorance of youth makes a discord in discourse, being not so experiencedly learned, nor artificially pra∣ctised, as to speak harmoniously, where the want makes my conversation dull with circumspection and fear; which makes my words flow through my lips, like lead, heavy and slow.
Thy wit sounds as thy beauty appears, the one charms the ears, the other attracts the eyes.
You have been more bountiful to me in your praises, than Nature in her gifts.
Since I perceive you to be so pleasing, we will be better acquainted.
Come my learned brothers, are we come now to hear a girl to read lectures of natu∣rall Philosophy to teach us? Are all our studies come to this?
Her doting father is to blame, he should be punished for this great affront, to us that's learned men.
Philosophers should be men of years, with grave and Au∣ster looks, whose countenances should like rigid laws affright men from vanities; with long wise beards, sprinkled with gray, that every hair might teach, the bare young Chins for to obey. And every sentence to be delive∣red like the Law, in flames and lightning, and flashes with great thunder, a foolish girl to offer for to read: O times! O manners!
Beauty and favour and tender years, a female which na∣ture hath denied hair on her Chin, so smooth her brow, as not to admit one Philosophical wrinkle, and she to teach, a Monster tic in Nature; since Na∣ture hath denied that sex that fortitude of brain.
Counsel her father that her mother may instruct her in high housewifery, as milking Kine, as making Cheese, Churning Butter, and raising past, and to preserve consectionary, and to teach her the use of her needle, and to get her a Husband; and then to practise natural Philosophy without a Lecture.
It is a prodigious thing, a girl to read Philosophy; O di∣vine Plato! how thy Soul will now be troubled, Diogenes repents his Tub, and Seneca will burn his books in anger. And old Aristotle wish he had never been the master of all Schools, now to be taught, and by a girl.
Have patience and but hear her, and then we shall have matter store to speak and write against her, and to pull down her fame; in∣deed her very lecture will disgrace her more than we can write, and be re∣venged thus by her tongue.
Content, let us then go and hear her, for our sport, not be∣ing worth our anger.
By my truth Mistress the Lord de l' Amour is a fine person.
The truth is, that he seems as if Nature had given to time the finest and richest stuff in her Shop, to make his person off, and time as the Tailor hath wrought and shaped his person into the most become∣ing fashion; but yet, if his Soul be not answerable to his person, he is sine no otherwise; but as a fashionable and gay suit of Cloth on a deformed body, the Clothes may be fine and handsome, but the body ill favoured; so the body may be handsome, but the Soul a foul deformed creature.
But a fine and handsome body may hide a deformed Soul, although a fine suit of Clothes will not hide a deformed body; for a deformed body will be perceived in despite of the fine Clothes.
So will a deformed Soul in the despite of a handsome body, for the Soul will appear in the Actions, as the body in the shape; being as crooked in vice as the body in Limbs.
What is the actions of the Soul?
The passions and will.
But man obscures the passions and restrains the will.
So man may obscure his body, and bombast his Clothes; but it is as impossible to restrain an evil will, as to make a crooked body straight.
Gentlemen, pray do not think me rude by drawing you from your serious studies, by an intruding invitation; to hear a young student discourse.
It is true Sir, we should have been glad to have heard you discourse, for you might instruct us, where as a young student is rather to be instructed; for it is time that brings knowledge or gets wit, or speaks aloe∣quently.
It is true, but yet in some natural ingenuity it is as strong as time, and produces that which time of it self could not do.
Sir, if your young students wit, be as fine as her standing place, it will be delightful.
Sir, you have adorned her Theater to enthrone her wit.
Gentlemen. I wish her wit may furnish, and so adorn your under∣standing, but if you please to sit, such as it is, shall be presented to you.
Sir, we perceive now, you have invited us to feast our eyes, not our ears.
Gentlemen, if you please to give her so much patience to hear her, then judge, or censure, as you please.
The Majesty of Age, and sage gravity, are objects able to put unexperienced and unpractised youth out of Countenance; and bash∣fullness is the greatest enemy to discourse, for it discomposes the Count∣nonce, disturbs the thoughts, disorders the words, and confounds the sense therein; but youth hath many times this advantage, that it apprehends not the disgrace, that experienced years and deeper judgment doth; For the truth is, bashfulness proceeds from too great an apprehension; but I not appre∣hending far enough, may commit errors through a confident ignorance, but if you think my confidence too much, for my youth; yet pray judge not my modesty to little for my Sex, for speaking belongs as much to the Female Sex as to the Masculine; so as it be on sober Subjects, and to grave Fathers, and wise men, or intrude to any degree of Age, or Sex, or Birth; so as it be timely, suitably, rationably, and modestly delivered; And why may not women speak in public and to public assemblies, as well as in private visits, and particular entertainments, and to particular persons and acquaintance? And in reason it should be more commendable, that women's discourse and actions are such, as they fear no witness. Nay, they ought never to speak or show themselves to those persons that are not domestic, without sufficient witness, for private discourses, which are like whisperings, and secret meetings, and particular en∣tertainments, are subject to loos customs, rude behaviours, and lascivious dis∣courses, mischievous designs, and dangerous plots, all which takes leave without warrant, and assaults without warning; yet it is probable this Aunt∣tory will think my Father is too indulgent to his Child, to let her to make public Orations, or that he is too vain glorious, as to believe or hope his Child may get applause, or esteem in the world, by her discourses. But First, I must remember them, that it is natural for Parents to be fond of their Children; Secondly, it is no crime nor indiscretion, for a Father to believe or think his Child may have as much wit as any other mans Child, if he have given as good education: Thirdly, it is not against nature and reason, but
that women may discourse of several subjects as well as men, and that they may have as probable opinions, and as profitable inventions, as fresh fancies, as quick wits, and as easy expressions, as men; if their education be ensue∣rabble to their natural capacities and ingenuityes; As for my self, I must tell this assembly, I have been bred industriously, for I have been instructed with as much knowledge as my years was capable to understand; but the truth is, that my educators strove to ripen my understanding, before the natural time, like those that hastens fruit to be ripe, forcing it by artificial means, not staying for the natural heat of the Sun, so was my understanding, like as the tree, and my wit as the fruit, by which it wants the Aromaticall, and delicious relish, that natural time gives; which makes me fear, my wit will relish to the ears of the hearers, as such forced fruits to the taste of the eaters: I have only this request, that, though you may dislike it for want of the natural sweetness; yet pray esteem of it for the rarity, as being not usual for one of my years and Sex, to speak, argue, and make Orations in a public assembly; but it is likely, this assembly may think this is a vain glorious Prologue, to my following discourse; But I must tell this worthy, grave, and learned, assem∣bly, that I am not bound to follow a vain custom, nay, I may say, a dishonest one, as when Orators do dissemble, as on my Conscience most do, self love being natural to all; besides, many times they disgrace their birth, by a dis∣sembling humbleness, and belly their thoughts, knowledge and education, when as they say, they are unworthy to speak to such an assembly; and that they are unlearned, their knowledge is little, their understanding dull, their judgment weak; their capacity narrow, and that they are unexperienced and unfurnished of expressions, to deliver the subject, or matter of their discourse; if this or the like which they say be true, they abuse the Auditory, and them∣selves, to invite them or draw them, to hear that, they think is not worth the listening to, and if they be not so (as they say) they belly the nature, and adieu∣cation, which heaven forbid I should be so ungrateful to nature, so base to my birth, so undutiful to my Educator, and so unthankful to the Gods. No, no, I will not be so, for I will publicly acknowledge natures favours, who hath given me more wit, than time hath given me years; she hath furnish∣ed me with ingenuity, beyond an ordinary proportion, and hath drawn the plat form of my mind Mathematically, and pensiled me with her best could∣lord dyes, for which I am bound morally to serve her; As for my birth, as I am of the same kind of Mankind; I am equal with the rest, let my conditi∣on be never so poor, I have no reason to be ashamed of the Kind; but my birth is Honourable by length of time, as for my education, it hath been sin∣gular, having not been bred as other Children accustomarilie are, who hath liberty to fling away their youthful time in idle sports, or useless learnings, and those that they are taught by, are young and unexperienced Tutors; but I must tell this worthy and experienced assembly, that I was not bred with powdered Curls, but silver hairs, Age, I bowed to, and obeyed with duty, Age, I viewed with respects, and listened to with attention; Age, directed my senses, manured my brain; pulled up, or out, the roots of ignorance, and weeds of errors, sowed knowledge, and planted understanding; for, my educator, which was my dear Father, hath been industrious, careful, prudent, bountiful, and studious, for my improvement; for which my treble duty doth attend his life, and my prayers supplicates for to prolong it, which hey∣ven knows, I desire beyond my own; As for the Gods which gives all good, let those that dare be unthankful, I dare not, such as Atheists that believes in
none; but pardon me for intruding one your patiences, with a tedious and self discourse, although I could not well avoid it, but now, with your leave, most Noble Auditors, I shall first treat of Nature, although Nature is an end∣less Theme to treat of; for though that the principles of Nature, or Natures principles may be easily numbered, yet the varieties which change doth make on those principles are infinite; for well may Nature, if man by Art can make infinite varieties, by change of few principles, as for example in music, from 8. Notes, by change, infinite Tunes, are, or can be made; from the figure of 1. to 9. what Multiplication? From 24. letters, how far can the mind dictate it self in, numerous words, and different languages? Thus Nature the tutoress to man, and only man, have taught him to imitate her; for, though she is the Mother to all other Creatures, yet man is her beloved Child; for she, like as a fond parent, leads and directs man to discoveries, and as it were, points and marks out their ways, and as a diligent Tutoress, explains and expounds her self by her works, and her several works, like as several books hath several prints, and are bound in several vollums, and are keep• safe in several Libraries, of several Ages, by aged time; but some∣times Nature behaves her self like a Huntress, and makes Mankind as her Hounds, to hunt out the hidden effects of unknown causes, leading Mankind by three several strings, as by the string of observation, the string of concepti∣on, and the string of experience, and as hounds snuffs and snuffels on the Paths they tread, so mans thoughts, like as hounds noses, are busily employed. And as hounds springs out upon a following sent, and with open mouth makes a loud cry; so men, when they make any new discoveries, divulges it with their voices, or noises of the tongue and pen; yet man at this hath no reason to take exceptions, because he gains knowledge thereby, and Nature may use her own as she pleases; but sometimes Nature is as a Paintress, and the mind of man is as the Copy of Nature, drawn by her self; for the mind of man is as infinite as Natures self, having no dimension, nor extension, and the thoughts are the infinite Creatures therein, and the brain is the ground to paint on, and the motions of life are the pencils to work, or draw with. And in these Copies Nature views her self, yet all animal Creatures, espe∣cially Mankind, seems of a middle mixture, as, not so gross as the Earth, nor so pure as the Heavens, which is the cause man is difficult to some things, and easy to others; as it is easier for the eyes to look down on the earth, than to stare up to the Heavens, and for the feet to step down on steps, than to step up on stayres, or for the whole body to slyde down a hill, than to clamber up a hill, so it is easier for life to slyde down to vice, than to mount up to virtue, for what is purest is still placed highest, that is the reason that the Celestial bodies are placed ova•••, as the Terrestrial body under us; and we being mixed, are placed in the midst: Upon this Text give me leave to treat of the two Globes, the Celestial, and the Terrestrial, in the Celestial, there are Se∣ven Worlds, where the Sun is the Center World, which being a flame, streams forth in lines of light, upon the other Six Worlds; and as those Six Worlds, or the Seventh World, moves, so have they light or darkness; but the Sun which is the flaming World, or the World of flame, is fed as a Lamp with an oily substance, from the other Six Worlds, which oily sub∣stance the Sun sucks to him, from thence, by attracting Motions, these Six Worlds I will similize to Six Udders, paps, or breasts, from which the Sun, like as a young greedy appetite sucks, and draws out, each in their turns, and as I said by attraction, this oily moisture, which oily moisture is as the
milk; the Worldly Udders, or Uddery Worlds, doth as all Udders doth, which as soon as they are drawn dry fills again, and if they be not sufficiently drawn, their moisture grows thick and gross; like as crudled milk, which corrupts and becomes Ulcerous, from whence runs venomous matter, which falling down breeds amongst animals, many diseases as the rot murring, and the like amongst beasts; And amongst men the Small pox, measels, and all sorts of fevers, even to the plague, &amp; according as the corruptions are, or runs, the diseases are more dangerous, or less violenter, or weaker, lasts longer, or ends sooner; and if these Udders be drawn faster than they can be naturally filed, they become chopped and dry, empty and shrunk, which causes dearth and famine; And though we cannot see a dearth in the face of the Moon, and the rest of the Planets, as on the face of the Earth, nor see famine in the face of the Moon, as in the face of a Man; yet for all we know, there may be dearths, plagues, and wars in those Planets, as in particular Kingdoms; although the Planets have no such Intelligences from each other, as particular Kingdoms hath; yet questionless they have Traffic and Commerce, though mankind cannot visibly perceive, which way, or by what means. Also the Planet•, by their circular motions, may draw up vapours from the Sea, and earth, like as the Wheels of water Mils. As for the Terrestrial globe, it turns upon a Pole, as a Pig upon a Spit, and the Sun is the fire that rosts it; but when the Sun is scorching hot, the earth like overroasted meat, it burnt and black, and when that over cold moist vapors, quenches out the heat of these fiery beams, then is the earth as raw; but when as equal heat, at equal di∣stance, by equal Motions, agrees Simpathetically, then is the Terrestrial globe well dressed, and full of gravy, which causes nurishing health; but to draw to a conclusion of my Philosophical lecture, I will similize the Celestial, and Terrestrial globes, which globes, are as Man and Wife; the Celestial as the Husband, the Terrestrial as the Wife, which breeds and bears, what the Coo∣lestiall begets, For the Celestial and the Terrestrial globes are Natures work∣ing houses, where, Animals, Vegetables, and Minerals, are wrought into se∣viral figures, shaped, and formed into divers fashions, like as Smiths makes diverse fashioned things out of metals, so Nature is as the Smith, the Earth as the metal, the Sun as the fire, the Sea as the quenching water, the air as the Bellows, youth is the Furnace; time is the Forge, and motion is the Ham∣mer, both to shape, and break asunder; but for fear I should break your patience, I shall desist from speaking any more at this time.
Now you have heard her, what do you say?
I say let us go home and make a fun∣rall pile of our books, that are Philosophy, burn them to Ashes, that none may file as Phoenix like out of that dust.
No, throw them at those foolish men that walk in black, who would be thought learned by the outside; although they are unlettered.
Take heed of that, for so they may have hopes of a recur∣reaction, and so rise again in ragged covers, and tattered torn sheets, in old Duck-lane, and quack their to be bought.
No, no, we will all now send for Barbers, and in our great Philosophies despair, shave of our reverend beards, as excrements, which once did make us all esteemed as wife, and stuff boys foot-balls with them.
Nature, thou dost us wrong, and art too prodigal to the effeminate Sex; but I forgive thee, for thou art a she, dame Nature thou art; but never showed thy malice until now, what shall we do?
Faith all turn gallants, spend our time in vanity and sin, get Hawks and Hounds, and running Horses, study the Card and Dye, Rich Clothes and Feathers, wast our time away with what this man said, or what that man answered, backbite and rail at all those that are absent, and then renownce it with new Oaths Alamode.
No, no, honour this Virgin whose wit is supreme, whose judgment is Serene as is the Sky, whose life is a Law unto her self and us, virtue her handmaid, and her words so sweet, like to harmonious music in the Air, that charms our Senses and delights the Soul, and turns all passions in our hearts to love, teaches the aged, and instructs the youth, no Sophister, but Mistress still of truth.
I begin to be so fond of your Company, as I cannot be long absent therefrom.
It is your favours to me, which favours are above my merits, indeed I have no merits, but what your favour creates.
You seem so virtuous, and sweetly dispositioned, and are so beautiful and witty, as I cannot but admire, and love you.
I dare not be so rude, not yet so ungrateful, to speak against my self, now you have praised me, for your words are like to Kings, which makes all currant coin they set their stamp on; although the substance should be mean and of no value.
Thy words are Musical.
I wish I could speak as eloquently upon every subject, as several birds sings sweety in several Tunes, to please you.
Do you love me so well, as to wish it only for my sake.
Yes, and how should I do otherwise, for my affections to you was ingrafted into the root of my infancy, by my Fathers instructions and perswasious; which hath grown up with my Age.
Are you both so serious in discourse, I will break your friendship, or I will fall to the grave of death in the attempt.
Heaven make you as virtuous as loving, and I shall be happy in a Wife.
Heaven make him as constant, as I virtuous, and I shall be sure of a gallant man to my Husband.
By my fathers relation to me, I understand, that all this worthy As∣sembly, are students in morality; wherefore I shall treat this time of pas∣sions, wherein I make no question, being all sage, that you have not only learnt to distinguish them, but have practised, how to temper, and govern them; but perchance you will say to your selves, what need she speak of that, which have been so often treated of, only to make repetitions of former Authors; but you all know without my telling you, that new applications may be made, on often preached Texts, and new arguments may be drawn from old principles, and new experiences may be learnt from former follies; but howsoever, my discourse shall not be very long, least radios impertinen∣cies should make it unpleasant to your ears, &amp; cause too great a loss of time, to your better employments; but my discourse is, as I said on the passions, which I will first divide, as the Ancient Philosophers, into two, love, and hate. First, I will treat of pure love, which is self-love, for love to all other things is but the effects thereof. And is derived therefrom, self-love is the sole passi∣on of the Soul, it is a passion pure in it self, being unmixed, although all other passions do attend it, this passion, called self-love, is the legitimated Child of Nature, being bred in infinite, and born in eternity; yet this passion of self-love, being the Mother of all other love is oftentimes mistaken for a fond, or a facile disposition, bred from a weak constitution of the body, or a strong, or rather exstravagant appetite of the Senses; or from a gross constitution, or evil habit, or custom of life, or an ill example of breeding; but these Childish humours, facile, and easy dispositions, foolish and earnest desires, gross, and greedy appetites, Inconstant, and evil Natures, these are not pure love, as the effects of self-love, for it doth it self hurt; but they are the effects of the body, and nor of the Soul, for some of them proceeds from a gross strength of body, hot, and active spirits, others from a tenderness, and weak∣nos of body, and faint spirits; but the true passions of love, which is self-love, but mistake me not, for when I say self-love, 〈…〉, as is appear∣taining
thereto, as love of honour, love of virtue, humane love, natural love, pious love, Sympathetical love, which are the true begotten Children of self-love: This love, hath no other object, but perfection, it hath an absolute command over life, it conquers death, and triumphs over torments, but every soul hath not this pure love, for there is a seeming self-love, and a real self-love; but as I said, every soul hath it not, for it is with souls, and the passi∣once therein, as with bodies, and the sensual life, some bodies are more healthful, and strong, others infirm and weak, some are fair, and well favou∣red, others foul and ill favoured, some are straight &amp; well shaped, others crook∣ed and deformed, some high, some low, some are of long life, others of short life, some lifes have more actions than others, some more sensitive relishes, than others, some good Natures, some bad, and all of that sort of Animals, we call mankind, and as the body and sensitive Spirits, so for the Soul and rational Spirits, for some hath (as I may say) more Soul than others, as some hath larger Souls than others, some purer than others, as being more Serene; &amp; some hath more ingenuity, and understanding than others. So passions, although one and the same sorts of passions, yet in some Souls, they are more Serene, and eel∣vated than others; but many times the pure passions of the Soul is so allied, with the gross humours of the body, as they become base, and of no good use; but in the passion of pure love, for the most part, dwells naturally Melan∣cholly: I mean, not that dry, cold, sharp humour, bred in the body, which makes it Insipid, enclosing the Soul, (as it were,) within Walls of stone, which causes a dull, heavy, and stupid disposition, as it oppresses, and lies, like a heavy burden on the Soul, hindering the active effects thereof; but this natural Melancholy, dwells not in every Soul, but only in the noblest; for it is the noblest effect, of the noblest passion, in the noblest Soul. As for the passion of hate, it is not that loathing, or aversion, which is caused by a full, or sick Stomach, or surfeited Senses, or glutted Appetites, or cross hue∣morse, or an Antipathy of dispositions, or evil fortunes, or the like; but the true passion of hate, is, in the Soul, not bred in the body; yet hate is a bastard passion of self-love, begot by opposition, bred from corruption, and born with disturbance, this hate as it is derived, from the bowels, and loins of self-love, so it pursues self-loves enemies, which is suspect falsehood, and nag∣lect: With this passion of hate, anger is a great Companion; these two pas∣sions being seldom asunder; but anger is oftentimes mistaken, as all the rest of the passions are, but this passion of anger, is one of the uselest passions of the Soul, and is so far from assisting forritude, as many think it doth; as it is an opposite enemy to it, for it cannot suffer patiently, and oftimes knows not what it Acts, or on what it Acts, or when it Acts; this passion is one of the furies of the Soul, which oftimes deposes reason; but a Choleric dispo∣sition, is sooner to be pardoned, and less to be feared, being bred in the body, and as the humour ebbes, and flows, this disposition is less, or more. But to return to the two Principle passions, which is love, and hate; I will at this time similize them, to two several Kingdoms, or Regions, love being the lar∣gest, for it reaches to the shades of death, and strongest, for it can endure, and hold out the assaults of any torment, being entrenched with fidelity, fortify∣ed with constancy, embattled with courage, victualled with patience, and are∣med, or manned with resolution; and were it not for the many labyrinths of feats, running in and out, with continual doubts, wherein, the con∣tent of the mind, is oftentimes lost, otherwise it would be as pleasant a 〈◊〉 as it is a strong one, having large prospects of honour, and Land-Skips
of perfection; green Meddows of hopes, wherein grows sweet Prim∣roses of Joy, and clear springs of desires, runs in swift streams of industry, by the banks of difficulty, besides this Kingdom is always serene, for the Sun of Fervency of always shines there: In this large Kingdom of love, reigns natural Melancholy, who is the Heroic Royalist, soberest, and wisest Prince born, in the mind, he directs his Actions with pru∣dence, defends his Kindome with courage, endures misfortunes with patience, moderates his desires with temperance, guides his Senses with judgment, orders his Speech with Sense, and governs his thoughts with reason, he is the commander of the Appetites; living in the Court of ima∣ginations, in the City of silences, in the Kingdom of love, in the little world called Man; and the greatest favourite to this Prince, is wit, and the Muses, are his Mistresses, to whom he applies his Courtship, recreating himself in their delightful! Company, entertaining himself with Balls, Masks, Pasto∣rills, Comedies, Tragedies, and the like, presenting them in the Bowers of fancy, built in the Gardens of Oratory, wherein grows flowers of Rhetoric; but the greatest enemies to this Prince, is unseasonable mirth, which oftimes disturbs his peace, by bringing in an Army of empty words, sounding their loud Trumpets of laughter, shooting of bald jests, beating the drums of idle∣nos, with the sticks of ridiculous Actions. But hate, although it be a King∣dome that is very strong, by reason it hath high mountainous designs, hard Rocks of cruelties, deep pits of obscurity, many Quagmires of subtlety, by which advantages, this Kingdom is inpregnable; yet the Kingdom of its self is barren, and Insipid, bearing nothing but thorny Bushes, of mischief and moss, of ill Nature, no noble thoughts, or worthy Actions, the climate is various, for the Air of the mind is gross, having thick mists of envy, which causes several sicknesses of discontent, other whiles it is very cold and sharp with spite, other times it is sulphury hot, with malice, which flashes light∣ning of revenge, which in a thundery fury breaks out: In this Kingdom of hate, reigns anger, who is a Tyrant, and strikes at every small offence, and many times on Innocence, and so unjust, as he seldom takes witnesses, pride, and jealousy, are his favourites, which governs all with scorn, and executes with fury; he imposes taxes of slander, and gathers levies of detract∣on; exception is his secretary, to note both words and Actions, he accu∣seth the Senses with mistakes, and beheads the Appetites, on the Scaffolds of dislike, he strangles truth, with the Cords of Erroneous opinions, and tor∣tures the thoughts one Wheels of foul suspicion, whipping imagination with disgrace, he confounds the Speech with disordered hast, that neither Sense, nor words, can take their right places; but anger dyes as most Tyrants doth, being kilt by repentance, and is buried in salt tears; betwixt these two Kingdoms of love, and hate, runs a salt Sea, of sorrow, which sometimes breaks into the Kingdom of love, and sometimes into the Kingdom of hate, from this Sea arises thick vapours of grief, which gathers into dark Clouds of sadness, which Clouds dissolves into showering tears, or windy sighs; but if this Sea be rough with the storms of misfortunes, or fomented with the tempest of impatience, it makes a dolorous noise of complaints, and laments, roleing with restless bellows of discontent, this is the King∣dome of love, but when this Sea breaks into the Kingdom of hate, it makes a hideous noise, a roaring, with exclamations, and cursings. Also from this Sea flows four rivers, quite through these two Kingdoms; two through the Kingdom of hate, and two through the Kingdom of love, those two
through the Kingdom of love, are pity, and compassion; which when they meet makes a full tide, of Charity, and overflows with bounty; but those that runs through the Kingdom of hate, are the two rivers, of fury, and despair, when these two rivers meet, they make a full tide of madness, and overflows with mischief; but fearing I should drown your patience with my overflowing discourse, I shall desist for this time.
Were all dead Morals Writers, risen again, and their each several souls crushed into one, that Soul would languish, till it sted the earth, in deep des∣pair, to see their glories last, and all their vaster writings, so despised.
Thus by the Music of a Ladies tongue,
Whose Cords, with wit, and judgment, is thus strung.
Pray young Lady stay, and take good Counsel along with you.
Good Counsel is a guest I would willingly entertain, and be glad of his acquaintance, and endeavour, to make a perfect friendship with, and a constant Companion.
Then pray Madam have a care of the Lady Incontinent, for she is full of designs against you, as I perceive by what I hear her say to my Lord.
Your Lord is a person of so much worth, and merit, as he will not yield to plots of destruction, to destroy the Innocent, he hath more Charity to heal a wound, than cruelty to make one; his tender Nature, and compassionate disposition, will strive to dry wet eyes, not force dry eyes to weep.
My Lord, Madam, is a generous, and noble Lord, but she is a dissembling crafty Lady, and knows how to attract my Lord, and to win him, to be of her belief, and I give you warning as a faithful Servant, both to my Lord and you.
I thank you friend, for your advertising me of this Lady; but I shall trust my self to heavens protection, fortunes favour, and your •••ds noble, and just Nature.
The Lady Sanspareilles wit, is as if it would over-power her brain.
O no, for her brain seems so well tempered, as if there were no conceptions, which springs therein, or propositions, or knowledge, pre∣scented thereunto; but it doth digest them with great ease, into a destine∣gushing understanding, otherwise she could not deliver her mind, and ex∣press her conceits, or opinions, with such method, and facility, as she doth.
She hath a Monstrous wit.
No, her wit is not a Monstrosity, but a generosity of Na∣ture, it is Natures bounty to her.
Certainly, Nature was never so bountiful, to any of that Sex, as she hath been to her.
The truth is, she favours the Female Sex, for the most part, more than she doth the Masculine Sex; because she is of the Female kind herself.
Faith, I could wish that I never wished before.
What wish is that?
Why, I wish, I were a Woman, but such a Woman as the Lady Sanspareille.
Ovid speaks of a Woman, that wished her self a Man, and the Gods granted her with, and she became a Man; but I never heard of a Man that was changed into a Woman.
That was, by reason they never wished that change.
That is a sign they thought the change would be far the worse.
Indeed, generally it would be so.
Well, for thy sake, I wish thou had thy wish.
My dear Mistress, what makes you so studious, as you are become pale with musing?
The reason is, that my Soul is flown out of my body, with the wings of desire, to seek for love; and my thoughts laboriously wanders after it, leaving my Senses, to a soiltary life, and my life to a Melancholy musing.
Faith, I had rather be buried under the ruins of hate, than have a Melancholy life.
And I am Melancholy, for fear I should be so buried.
If you would have love, you must give love.
Indeed love is like a Coy-Duck, it goes out to invite, or
draw in others.
Nay faith, a Coy-Woman cannot do so, for the Coyer she is, the
fewer Lovers she will have, for Coins starves Lovers, wherefore, if you
would not starve your beloved, you must be free, and twine about him, as the
Ivy doth the Ok.
Modesty forbids, it but were it lawful, and that it did
not infringe the Laws of modesty, I could hang about his neck, as the earth
to the Center, but I had rather starve my delights, than do an Act immodest,
or sursite his affection.
Noble Gentlemen, you are welcome, and, though I cannot promise to feast your Ears, with an eloquent Banquet; yet I hope it will prove so, as I hope it will not cause a dislike; for the several dishes of my discourse shall neither be bitter with railing, nor sharp with spite, nor salt brined with Satyr, nor lushious with flattery, and, though it may prove tasteless to the gusto of your humour, yet it will not be disagreeing to the stomach of your reason, nor dangerous to the life of your understanding; but, by reason this worthy Assembly is mixed, as Orators, Poets, young Students, and Souldi∣ers, it will be hard for me to divide my discourse so, as to give each Comp∣ny a Civil entertainment, but howsoever my endeavour shall not be wanting; for that wit I have, I shall waite upon you, I shall first speak to the young Students, because youth, and learning, is the beginning of life, and knowledge, and young brains are like plain paper books, where time as a hand, expire∣ence as a pen, and practice as Ink, writes therein; and these books contains several and divers Chapters. The First, is of knowledge. The Second, and Third Chapters, are of memory and understanding; these Chapters are but short. The Fourth, and Fifth Chapters, are conceptions and imaginati∣once; this Chapter contains more than half the book. The Last Chapter, is remembrance, which is also a very long Chapter, and the variety of thoughts are the several letters, in which these Chapters are writ; but they, are not all writ after one kind of writing, neither are they writ with one, and the same language; For knowledge is writ in great and plain letters, memory and un∣derstanding, in siner, and smaller letters; Conceptions, and Imaginations, after the manner of way, as like Hierogyphiks, Remembrance is writ, as after the like way of Characters; Knowledge is writ, in the Original Language
as we may liken to Hebrew; Memory and Understanding, are writ, in a language derived therefrom: Conception, and Imagination, are written in heathen Greek; Remembrance is writ in a mixed, or compounded language, like as English, but yet it is most like, that we call old English: But the most profitablest School is consideration; And the best Tutor is reason, and when the mind is distempered, or obstructed with Ignorance, education is the best Physic which purges it, cleanses and freeth it, from all gross, and foul, and filthy Errors; but the Educators, which are the Physician•, should be well chosen; for the plain truth is, that youth should be taught by those that are grave, and sage, that they may learn experience by the Second hand, otherwise Age only knows, but hath no time to practise in; but if that youth be taught good principles, their life grows high by Noble deeds, and broadly spreads with Honours, but when that youth have liberty to sport, and play, casting their learning time away, they grow like poi∣sonous plants, or weeds, which makes their life swell big, with veno∣mous passions, and dispositions, and burst with evil deed, but youth, their understanding is like their years, and bodies, little and weak, for the Soul is improved by the Senses, but Educators, their Physicians presents to their Senses, the most wholesome, and nurishing meat; for, as the body is nurished and grows strong, by good digestion, so doth the Soul gain know∣ledge by information, but, if the food be unwholesome, or more than the Stomach be able to digest, or that the body is not fed sufficiently, the body becomes lean, weak, saint, and sick, so the Soul, or mind; If the senses be imperfect, or the objects more than can be well disenst, or too many for the temper of the brain, or that the brain be too cold, or to hot, then the Soul or mind, like the body, decays, for, like as the bodily senses, so the senses of the Soul decays; for the understanding as the Spirits, grows saint, the judgment as the liver, wan, and weak, the memory as the eyes, grows dim and blind, the thoughts as the several limbs, grows feeble and lazy; but some remedy is for those diseases; for the speculative notes helps the dull memory, cordial learning, the faint understanding, purging, and opening, experience, the wan and obstructed judgment, and necessity exercises the lazy thoughts; but if the brain be defective, or the Soul imperfect from the birth, there is no re∣medy, for then the reason proves a dwarf, and the understanding a fool; but if the Soul be perfect, and the brain well tempered, then the Soul is like the serene and azure Sky, wherein reason as the Sun, gives light to all the Any∣mal World, where the thoughts, as several Creatures, lives therein; some being bred in the deep, and restless Ocean, of Imagination, others, as from the fixed Earth of knowledge, springs; and, as the Gods governs the World, and the Creatures therein, so the Soul should govern the body, and the Appe∣tites thereof; which governing, is to govern still to the best: As for the con∣tinuance of the World, so for the prolonging of the life of the body, which government I wish to the Soul of every young Student here. In the next place, I shall speak to Orators, whose study, and practice is language, and language, although it is not born with man, yet it is bred with man, or in man, either by their education, or their own Invention; for, if language had a beginning, it was invented by the Creature, if no beginning, it was taught them by the Gods; for, though that Nature made such Organs, as was pro∣per to express language with, yet it seems as if she did not Creat language, as a principal work, but if she did, then Orators tongues are Natures Mu∣sisal instruments; but the best Musical Instruments were better to lye un∣plaid
with, than to sound out of Tune, or to strike jarring discord, which displeases more than the harmony can delight, so likewise it were better not to speak, than to speak to no purpose, or to an evil design, but Oratory, or Rhetoric, is as all other Music is, which lives more in sound than in sub∣stance, it charms the ear, but it cannot enchant the reason, it may enslave the passions, but not conquer the understanding, it may obstruct truth, and abuse virtue, but it can neither destroy the one, nor corrupt the other, it can flatter up hopes, and raise up doubts, but it cannot delude experience, it can make factions, and raise tumults; but seldom rectify disorders; for it is to be obe∣served, that in those States, or Nations, where Oratory, and Rhetoric floe∣risheth most, the Common-wealth is for the most part distempered, and Ju∣stice looses her seat, and many times the State looses its former Government, Customs and Laws, witness the Romans, Athens, and Lacedaemonians, and others, that were ruined by their flourishing Rhetoric, and factious Ore∣tory; but it is thought that the flowers of Rhetoric is much voted since the time of the Athens, through the whole World, and that the lively Colours are quite lost, if it be so, then surely the daff is much in the first education, of Children; for in Infancy is a time, these should take a good print, but their Nurses is their Grammar, and her tongue is their first Tutor, which most commonly learns them the worst part of Speech, which parts are Eight; as impertinent questions, cross answers, broken relations, false re∣ports, rude speeches, mistaking words, misplaccing words, new words of their own making without a signification: Wherefore, parents that would bring up their Children elegantly, and eloquently, they must have a learned Grammar, and a wise Tutor at the first, to teach them, for the mouth as the Press, Prints the breath as the paper, with words, as the Ink, and reason, and sense, binds them up into a book, or volume of dis∣courses; but certainly the Orators of this Age for eloquence, and elegance, comes not short of the eloquent Orators of Athens, or any other State, they only use it to better designs, than to make Wars on their Neighbours, to banish their Citizens, or those that ought to be rewarded, to alter their Government, and ruin their state; no worthy Orators, you use your eloquence for peace, love, and unity, and not for face∣tion War and ruin; for which, may the Gods of eloquence assist you. But there is two sorts of Orators, the one bred up in Schools of Art, to rules, forms and tenses, the other is bred up in the School of Nature, which only observes her rules, and studies her works; for though all Orators are not Poets, yet all Poets are natural Orators, and hath a natural, eloquent, and elegant, and easy expression; for, if a man should have a Poetical brain, if he had not a full expression to deliver his conceits, they would be as if they were not, for, as their may be several fancies, and conceits, raised from one object or subject, so there requires several significant words, to express them; for, as time is the marks of eternity, so words are the marks of things, but in∣deed Poets hath a harder task than Orators, for Orators builds their dis∣course upon solid grounds, when Poets builds their discourse upon airy foundations, but the two principles of Poetry, is similizing, and distinguishing, which are fancy, and judgment, and some Poets brains are so happy, that as soon as they have bre, or created any fancy, the tongue is ready to deliver them; but some brains are a long time in breeding, and some fancies puts the brain into great pains, and hot, and painful throws; and some tongues as ill Midwifes, strangles strong fancies in the birth, but a
volable tongue, is like an expert, and understanding Midwife, which makes easy, safe, and quick dispatch, for wit and judgment, are both the Children of the brain, begot by Nature; being both Twin Sisters, and so Ingenious, and Inventive they are, that they build their arguments so curiously, and compile the sense into so small a compass, that there is no waste room, nor superfluous words, nor painted phraises, nor useless parentheses, nor obe∣structed Sentences, for they build with fancy, and compile with similizing cut, and carved, with Allegories, polished with numbers, and oftimes adorned with Rhyme, the persons to which wit, and judgment; the Children of Na∣ture are placed, as Sojourners, or Boorders, are Poets, who are Natures favou∣rites, and for the education of her Children, she rewards them, by enriching their minds, though not their purses; for she leaves that to Fortune, but Fortune through Envy to Nature, is seldom their friend: Also Nature, gives her Favourite Poets delights; for Poets takes more delight, and plea∣sure in their own thoughts and conceptions, than an absolute Monarch in his power and Supremacy; for like as Birds, that hops from Bough to Bough, whereon they sit and sing; so Poets thoughts moves, from Theme, to Theme, making sweet Melody; and as Hens broods Chickens, which Chickens, are not hashed, until they have strength to pick a passage through their shells, with their Bills, and when they are sledged, flies from their Nest on a high perching branch, so the brain lays Imaginations, and brood, fancies, and the tongue as a Bil, picks a passage through the lips, and being feathered with words, winged with verse, flies up even with numbers, to fems high Tow∣er; but the Muses the Handmaids to Nature, doth as all other Maidens, loves the Courtship of the Masculine Sex, which is the cause, or reason they seldom visit their own Sex, but passes their time in the Company, and Con∣versation of men; by some men, they are only admired, and loved, by o∣theirs, they are saed to, and enjoyed, which happy Suitors, are Poets; but the Muses, as all other Female takes a delight to enjoy their Lovers alone, that makes them separate themselves from other Company; and Poets as all Lo∣verse, doth love solitude: wherefore, Poets the lovers of the Muses, and the Muses lovers of the Poets, oftimes chooses a solitary life, as being a Para∣dise, for Innocent delight, wherein the Senses lies on soft banks of repose, the whilst the mind with a sober, and serious peace, wall•es in the silent shades of contemplation, shunning the hot and burning Sun of high ambition, and there the active thoughts; the Children of the mind, in harmless sports, doth with the Muses play, and on their heads Garlands of Fancy wear, made all of Rhetoricks choicest flowers, whose Colours fresh and gay, thus are the thoughts adorned and decked, as the fair Month of May; about this paradise, which paradise is a solitary life, the calm smooth River of safety flows, which Winds, or Circles in the life, from suffering, or acting injury, or wrong: And from this River of safety, runs many streams of pleasures, wherein the mind refreshing Bathes, secure and free, no false witness to accuse their Innocence; no tempestuous storms, nor dreadful Thunders hard, nor flash∣ing lightning there appears, all is their Serene and clear, unless sometimes thin Clouds of Melancholy falls in fresh showering tears, or from the heart arises some gentle sighs, which breathing out Fans, like to Zephyrus Winds; and in this solitary life 3. Trees doth grow, Peace, Rest, and Silence, are they named, the fruits they bare, is plenty, ease, and quite.
On which the mind deliciously cloth seed,
Whose lushious Juice, tranquillity as fat doth breed;
Reason the Nerves, and Grissels of the mind,
Grows strong, and cures the understanding blind;
Ther's none but Fools, this happy life would shun,
Such as would seek in rugged ways to run:
O Fools! O Fools! to love their torments so,
That they will rather choose to hell, than Heavens go.
But there is no man can enjoy this worldly Paradise, without a defence; for none can live in peace, that is not prepared as ready for War, for both the Theological, Civil, Common, and Accustomary Laws, are protected by the Marshall Law, and the Marshall Power, is the Supreme Authority, placing, and displacing, and is the Monarchical Power, that doth not only protect all other Laws, but commands them with threats, and is obeyed with Terror and fear, honoured for the fame, and hated for the Tyranny; but Soldiery is a painful, careful, and dangerous, although noble profession, but as I said, tic one of the safest, and securest protections; for it is protest∣on to the weak, and infirm, to the decrepit, and aged, to the shiftless youth, and to the saint, fearful, and tender esfeminate Sex, it is a guard unto the Ash∣es of the dead, to the Monuments of the Meritorious, and to the Temples of the Gods. And were it not for Marshall-Discipline, there could be no peace kept, truth and right would be torn from the Owners, Justice would be pull∣led out of her Seat, Monarchy thrown out of his Throne, and though a Soul∣dier may loose his life sooner than Nature did ordain; yet in recompense, honour buries him, and fame builds him a glorious Monument over his sleep∣ing Ashes; but by reason that fame is a Soldiers chief reward, I ought not to pass it by, whithout mentioning it; As for fame, it is a second life, and as I may say, the Soul of merit; but there is a difference, betwixt the Records of time, Fame, and Infamy; for there are many things, that are writ in the Re∣cords of time, that is, neither in Fems Tower, nor Infamies Dungeon, that which is writ in the Records of time, is strange accidents, unlucky chances; unusual Objects, unexpected preferments, or advancements, by Fortunes fa∣four, or partial affections, also great ruins, losses, and crosses, also Plagues, Deaths, Famines, Wars, Earthquakes, Meteors, Comets, unusual Sea∣sons, extraordinary Storms, Tempests, Floods, Fires, likewise great strength, very old Age, Beauty, deformities, unnatural Births, Monsters, and such like, which time Records: But Fame is the Godess, of eminent, and Merito∣rios Actions, and her Palace is the Heaven, where the renowns which are the Souls of such Actions, lives; I say Eminent, and Meritorious Act∣once; for all Meritorious Actions, are not Eminent, but those that transcends an usual degree, as extraordinary valour, Patience, Prudence, Ju∣stice, Temperance, Constancy, Gratitude, Generosity, Magnaminity, Endue∣stry, Fidelity, Loyalty, Piety, also extraordinary Wisdom, Wit, Ingenui∣ties, Speculations, Conceptions, Learning, Oratory, and the like; but it is not sufficient to be barely endued with those virtues, and qualities, but these virtues, and qualities, must be elevated, beyond an ordinary degree, inso∣much, as to produce some extraordinary Actions, so as to be Eminent; for Fame dwells high, and nothing reaches her, but what is Transcendent, either in worth, or power; for it is to be observed, that none but Ioves Mansion is
purely free, from deceit, and corruptions, for Nature is artified, and fame is often forced by fortune, and conquering power, and sometimes bribed by flattery, and partiality, and in Times Records there is more false reports than true, and in Infamous Dungeon, which is deep, although not dark, being in∣lightened by the eye of knowledge, and the lamp of Memory, or Remem∣bronco, which divulges, and shows to several, and after Ages, the evil deeds which lies therein, as Thefts, Murder, Adultery, Sacrilege, Injustice, evil Government, foolish Counsels, Tyranny, Usurpation, Rapine, Extortion, Treason, broken promises, Treachery, Ingratitude, Cozening, Cheating, Sherk∣ing, Lying, Deluding, Defrauding, factions, Disobedience, Follies, Errors Vices, Fools, Whores, Knaves, Sycophants, Sloth, Idleness, Injury, Wrong, and many Hundreds the like; yet many Innocent virtues, and well deser∣avenge deeds, at least good Intentions, lies in the Dungeon of Infamy, cast therein by false constructions, evil Events, Malice, Envy, Spite, and the like; Sometimes some gets out by the help of right interpretation, friendly assi∣stance, or eloquent pleading: but yet these are very seldom, by reason the Dungeon is so deep, that it almost requires a supernatural strength, to pull out any dead therein, for therein, they are oftner buried in Oblivion, than translated by pleading; but as I said, many Innocents are unjustly cast into Infamies Dungeon, and lies for ever therein, and many a false report is writ in times Records, and never blotted thereout: And many vain, and unwor∣thy Actions, feigned virtues, and vicious qualities, hath got not only into Fems Palace, but are placed high in Fems Tower; and good successes, although from evil designs, and wicked deeds, doth many times usurp, the most chief∣est, and highest places, as to be set upon the Pinnacle, for fortune conquering, power and partiality, forces, carries, and throws more into fems Palace, than honest Industry, leads, or merit advances therein, or unto which is un∣just, yet not to be avoided; for Fortune, and victory, are powerful, and so powerful, as many times they tred down the Meritorious, and upon those pure footstool, they raise up the unworthy and base; thus fems base Born, thrust out the Legitimate heirs, and usurp the Right, and Lawful Inhere∣tance, of the Right owners of fems Palace: Wherefore worthy Heroics, you cannot enjoy fame, when you will, nor make her sound out so loud, as you would, nor so long as you would, nor where you would have her, unless you force her, which is only to be done by the assistance of time, the providence of forecast, the diligence of prudence, the Ingenuity of Industry, the direction of opportunity, the strength of Power, the agility of Action, the probability of opinion, the verity of truth, the favour of Fortune, the esteem of Affection, the guilts of Nature, and the breeding of education; besides that, fame is of several humours, or Natures, and her Palace stands on several soils, and her Trumpet sounds out several Notes, Aires, Strains, or Ditties; for some Aires, or Strains, are pleasant, and cheerful, others sad and Melancholy; and sometimes she sounds Marches of War, some to Charge, some to Re∣treat; also sometimes her Palace stands on Rocks of adversity, other times on the flat soils of prosperity, sometimes in the Sun shine of plenty, other times in the shade of poverty, sometimes in the flowery Gardens of peace, other times in the bloody fields of War; but this is to be observed, that fame at all times sounds out a Soldiers Renown louder than any others; for the sound of Heroic Actions spreads furthest, yet the renown of Poets sounds sweetest; for fame takes a delight to sound strains of wit, and Aires of Fan∣cies, and time takes pleasure to record them; but worthy Heroics, give
me leave to tell you, that if time and occasion doth not fit, or meet your No∣ble ambitions; you must fashion your Noble ambitions to the times, and take those opportunities that are offered you; for if you should slip the sea∣son of opportunity, wherein you should so the seeds of Industry, you will loose the harvest of Honourable deeds, so may starve, wanting the bread of report, which should feed the life of applause; but noble Heroics, when you adventure, or set forth, for the purchase of Honour, you must be armed with fortitude, and march along with prudence, in an united body of patience, than pitch in the field of fidelity, and fight with the Sword of Justice, to maintain the cause of right, and to keep the privileges of truth, for which, you will be entailed the Heirs, and Sons of fame; and my wishes and Prayers shall be, that you may be all Crowned with Laurel.
Silence all thundering Drums, and Trumpets loud, with gliste∣ring Arms, bright Swords, and waving Plumes.
And the feared Cannon powdered, shall no more,
Force the thin Air with horror for to roar;
Nor the proud sleeds, with hollow hooves to beat
The humble Earth, till Echoes it repeat.
This Lady makes Greek Tactiks to look pale,
And Caesars Comentaries blush for shame.
The Amazonian Dames, shakes at her Name.
The Lady Muses are deposed, unthroned from their high Pal∣lace of Parnassus-Hill.
Where she in glory, with Poetic slames, there sits,
In Triumph, Empress of wits;
Where her bright beams, our Poets doth inspire,
As humble Mortals, from her gentle fire:
She is the only Muses, gives Fancy slore,
Else, all our Poets, they could write no more.
Were the oiled tongue of Tully now alive, and all the rest of glibed tongued Orators, with their best arguments, to force a truth, or else with subtlety of slight to avoid it; those tongues with trembling Palsies, would be all struck dumb, with wonder and amazement, to hear truth Clothed so gently, as to move all Orators, their passions into love, admi∣red Virgin.

My Lord, what makes you frown on me, surely I never willingly offended you?
But the report I hear of you offends me.
I hope my behaviour is not liable to any aspersion or evil censure; for, as you have used me civ∣lie, so I have behaved my self modestly.
I perceive you are a subtle insinuating young Lady.
Think me not subtle, for being so broad as not to slight your Love; not so uncivil, as to scorn your noble favours; but strive to merit your worthy affections; but if I have erred in my endeavours, pray pardon me, and if you please to tell me my error, I shall rectify it.
I hear you will speak more lies, than tell truths.
Truly I am too strict a Votary to truth to tell a lye.
I should be glad you were vowed one of her Order.
I am so, and have taken the habit of sincerity upon me.
Tell me truly, do you never use to lye?
If you have opinion that I never, or seldom, speak truth, let me say what I will, you will still believe it is a lye; but truly, I did never tell a lye as I do know of, but did always speak truth.
I hear to my great grief you have many faults, pray mend them.
I am sorry there are so many ill reports, or rather aspersions laid on me as to grieve you; but surely, youth cannot commit many faults; but Age, that hath had time to commit faults in; but if you can believe my faults surmounts not all accounts: I shall desire to know them.
Examine yourself, and you will find them.
I shall call a particular Council, and make a General search, and what thoughts, words, or actions, I can find guilty, or prove Cri∣minal, I shall condemn, and sacrifice them on the Altar of Repentance, and crave mercy and forgiveness.
Pray do so.
The Queen of Attention is come to be one of your Aunt∣ence.
I am come to hear, and see your Daughter, whom same reports to be the wonder of this Age.
It had been more proper, and fit, for my Daughter to have waited at your Court-Gates, until your Majesty had commanded her into your pre∣sense, than for your Majesty to come hither, to hear, and see her; but she being a plain bred girl, durst not be so bold.
If your Daughters wit be answerable to her beauty, she is a won∣der indeed.
Madam, this gracious honour, and honourable grace, is beyond the management of my young years; the evil of my weak confidence, and the compass of my little wit, and my obscure breeding, hath made me so Ignorant, that I know not in what manner I should behave, or address my¦self towards your Majesty; but if I commit faults in misbehaviour, pray im∣put it to my ignorant youth, and not to disobedience.
I see nothing yet in your behaviour, but that you may be not only a pattern for young, but also for grave Age, to take example from.
Madam, the generosity of your Majesties Nature, the Mag∣nificence of your Majesties mind, and the Charity of your Majesties dispose∣tion, gives an overflowing commendation, like to the goodness of the Gods, that gives more to the Creature, than the Creature can deserve.
Let me tell you young Lady, your speeches are as pleasing to the ear, as your beauty is delightful to the eye.
Your Majesty is like a Deity, can turn or translate words, like poor Mortals, into a glorified sense, like as into a glorified body.
Sir Thomas Father Love, if your Daughter speak at all times, and always so eloquently, I should not wonder you let her speak in pub∣lick.
I beseech your Majesty, that you will rather judge me an over fond Father, which is natural, than a vain opiniatour, in that I give her liberty to speak in public.
If it were a vanity, it might be well forgiven; but pray let me hear her speak.
Great Queen! I, nor no other, should offer, or dare to speak before, or to such Supreme persons as your Majesty, without a sore preme∣ditation; for the words and behaviours of speakers should be fitted to the de∣grees and qualities, Powers, Offices, and Authorities of the Auditory; But your Majesties commands makes that an obedient duty, that would other∣ways be a presumption; wherefore, on the ground of duty I speak at this time before your Majesty; but the Royalty of your person, the brightness of your beauty, the fame of your virtues, and the glorious splendour of your Majestic Grandeur hath so amazed me, that my understanding is as it were blind, which will cause my tongue to stagger, and my words to run stumbling out of my mouth; but I hope your Justice will pardon them; For, as Divine Justice belongs to the Gods, moral Justice to Nature; so humane Justice to Monarchial Princes, which justice is weighed and measured out according to merit, or desert, be they good or bad: For which Justice Gods and Prin∣ces are both feared and loved; and Justice is the chief Pillar or upholder of Monarchical States and Commonwealths; for without Justice there can be no Government, and without Government there can be no Rule, and without Rule there can be no peace, and where peace is not, there will be wars and, wars causes ruin and destruction; But for the most part, those Kingdoms that have arrived to the height of Glory, declines or falls to ruin: The reason is, that a low condition is necessitated, and weak; wherefore they seek for help to strengthen themselves, which makes or rather forces every particular person to associate, &amp; unite either by Laws of Covenants, to which they submit and obey: But when a Kingdom is in a Glorious condition, and is full of prosperity, every particular Citizen or man thinks he can stand upon his own foundation, flinging off their suppor∣ters, which is Duty, and obedience, which makes them fall to ruin; For when men comes to that height of pride, caused by prosperity, that they all strive to be Superiors, and Commanders; they become Factious and mute∣nous against the Magistrates, Rulers, or Governors; which Factions begets wars, either by calling in Foreigners, or by making, or siding into parties a∣amongst themselves; for it is to be observed, that States, or Monarchies do oftner fall by the pride and Factions of the Commons, or Subjects, than by the Tyranny of the Rulers or Governors; But it is the nature of the vulgar sort of man-kind, to be the most basest, fearfulest &amp; dejected Creatures in ad∣varsity, that Nature hath made, and in prosperity to be the proudest, insulting∣est and imperious and cruelest of all Creatures. But Kings and Royal Prin∣ces should do as Gods, which is to keep their Subjects in awe, with the Super∣stitious fear of Ceremonies; wherefore Princes should do no actions, no, not the meanest, without Ceremony to astonish the vulgar; for Ceremonies be∣gets
fear, fear begets Superstition, Superstition Reverence, Reverence Obedi∣ence, Obedience brings Peace, Peace brings Tranquillity; But where Cere∣money is not used, the Gods are neglected, and Princes despised; for Ceremo∣no is the Throne which Gods and Princes sits on, which being pulled a∣way, they fall from their Glory; for Ceremony is the Royal Crown which makes them Majestic, it is the Sceptre by which they rule, it is the Altar at which all the Subjects kneel, do bow, and they offer up there their natural free liberty.
But most glorious Princess, you and your Subjects are like the Sun, and the rest of the Planets, moving perpetually, keeping their proper Sphere, they moving in civiler loyalty about you, to receive the light of your Authority, and you move in them as the just center, spreading your glorious beams round about the Circumference of your Dominions, and in the light of your com∣mands they see their duty: And your Laws are like the fixed Stars, which twinkling move in the night of great offences, and doth assist the innocent with sparkling light. And your Majesty governs like the Gods, your wis∣dome by your Works is known, and by your Wisdom is your Power Immense.
Young Lady let me tell you, that you are fit to be a Governess, (although you be very Young) that can speak so well of Govern∣meant.
It is happier for me to be a Subject to so gracious a Sovereign, than if I were govern a people my self.
Madam, you retire your self more to solitary than you were used to do.
Because I find the world not only more foolish, but more wicked than I thought it was, but who would endure the world, or the worlds folly, since solitariness is sweet and melancholy?
The truth is, that words pleases the world more than reason; and vice is exercised more than virtue.
You say right, for words takes the world of man-kind by the ears, drawing them about even where they please; when reason is not heard, also vice will be embraced, and virtue kicked away; thus words and vice will get a room, both in the head and heart, when reason and virtue are barred out, but if perchance they are crowded in, they are straight thrown out as unfit guests, or troublesome intruders.
But Madam, let me advise you from so much solitude, for obscu∣rity shadows virtue, and buries beauty.
And Solitude doth hide defects, as well as Excellencies.
But you have no defects to hide.
Nor Excellencies to divulge.
Tic strange you can be so crafty in dissembling, and yet so young; for you appear to me to be innocently modest, and of a bashful Na∣ture, and yet it is told me you are so impudently bold, speaking so wantonly, as it is a shame to Nature, which makes me fear you will prove disho∣nest.
Perchance I might learn modest words, but not the significati∣on; yet surely I never spake such words I understood not, nor have I many speaking faults to accuse me.
I am told you speak so knowingly of marriage, as if you were a mother of many children.
The mystery of marriage I neither know, nor guess at, neither do I know how children are bred or born.
If you be so ignorant, you may loose your Virginity for want of knowledge and wit to keep it.
I have been taught, none can be devirginated that suffers not immodest action, if so, I am a pure Virgin, and my thoughts are so in∣nocent, and my life so honest, as I wish the Chambers of my mind or soul, (which is the brain and the heart) were set open to your view; there should you see the pictures in the one, and read the letters in the other, for truth re∣cords all in the heart, and memory pencils all that the imaginations or Sen∣ses brings into the brain.
I cannot but believe what is so confidently reported; but your words are such charms, as they enchant my angry passions, and makes my will a prisoner.
Let reason, as a Knight of Chivalry, and truth as his E∣squire, set him free, and open the gates of understanding, then you might see virtue clothed with white Innocence, and truth free from the bonds of falsehood.
So you were as wife as witty.
Wisdom is built upon the Foundation of Experience; wherefore none can be wise but those that are old; but though I am too young to be wise, yet not to be vertously honest.
Pray Heaven you prove so.
This Lady Sanspareile hath a strange spreading wit, for she can plead causes at the Bar, decide causes in the Court of Jute∣cature, make Orations on public Theaters; act parts, and speak speeches on the Stage, argue in the Schools, preach in the Pulpits, either in Theology, Philosophy, moral and natural, and also physic and Metaphysick.
The truth is, she is ushered by the Muses, led by the Sciences, and attended by the Arts.
I do perceive my shiftless youth is round beset with enemies.
Suspicions round about me placed,
With slandring words my same disgraced:
My innocence, as crast is thought,
My harmless life to ruin brought;
Who will adore the Gods, if they
Vice, virtue, in one balance lay?
This Noble assembly may chance to think it a vanity in me, never to receive any particular visit or address from any particular or sin∣glee person, but I do so, by reason life is lost in particular acquaintance, as small Rivers are in running through the earth. But in the public, life swims as in a full Sea, having a fair gale of observation, and Sails of opportune time to swim withal, marking the Card of actions, and the Needle of dispositions
drawn or turned by the Loadstone of affection, to the North-pole of Expire∣ence, to guide me safe from the Rocks of slander, and quick-sands of scandal, till I come to the Port of death, there to unload my Lifes Merchandise; and I hope my Voyage may be so prosperous, as I may be enriched with the praises of After-Ages.
Likewise, the reason why I choose to speak in public, is, that I would not speak idly, for in public I shall take care of what I speak, and to whom I speak, when in private visitations to single persons, my speech may be care∣less with negligence, in which I may throw away my time with my words; For, to speak to no purpose, is to make words useless, and words is the marks to distinguish things, and Figures to number merits with, and Notes to record the noble Acts of men.
But at this time I am to speak by my Fathers command, upon a Subject which my contemplation hath no acquaintance with, which is marriage, and I hear by my Father, that you have all treated with him, or rather entreated him to bestow me in marriage, which is to make me unhappy, not but that I believe what I hear, which is, that you are all persons of Quality, Birth, Breed∣ing, and Merit, far beyond my desert, yet with the best, if any best there be, being all worthy; yet were I a wife to any one, I might be unhappy, by rea∣son marriage is an encumbered life, although the Husband and the Wife were fitly matched for years, Births, Fortunes, Dispositions, Humours, Capacities, Wits, Conversations, Constancies, Virtues, and affections; and first, by your leave, I will discourse of men's marriage, by reason Man being accounted the Supremer Creature, and always bearing Rule, he shall be first placed. As for marriage, to men it is a great hinderance to a speculative life, it cuts off Fancies Wings, and quenches out the Poetical Fire, it breaks the Engine of invention, disturbs sweet contemplation, corrupts honest Counsels, obe∣structs all Heroic actions, obscures fame, and often times causes infamy by the wives inconstancies, and many times by her indiscretion; for a man is dis∣honoured if his wife is but thought wanton, or but inclining to be amorous, and though she be as sober in her Nature, and as constant as any woman can be, yet the very suspicion is a disgrace, and if the suspicion is a disgrace, what is a visible truth? His very Neighbours makes Horns as he passes by their doors, whilst he sadly and shamefully hangs down his head with a dejected countenance, which makes him seem a Coward and a Fool, although it be unjust that the faults of the wife should be a blemish to the Husbands honour; yet so it is, this being the greatest cause why Husbands are jealous, which jealousy is more for their Honours sake, than for their Wives affections; thus you see how dangerous a thing it is for man to marry, who must trust his honour to the management of a Foolish Woman, and women naturally like children, inconstant, unless education doth rectify their frail natures, pee∣vish humours, various appetites, and inconstant affection: Likewise mar∣riage is not only apt to corrupt the mind with jealousy, but with Covetous∣ness; for the extreme fondness and natural love of Parents to their I will∣drone, makes them strive by all their endeavours to enrich them; this makes them gripe their Tenants, pinch and half starve their servants, quarrel and dispute with their neighbours, corrupt Judges take Bribes, besides it makes men apt to rebel, and turn Traitorus, murmuring at their Taxes and impositions, it also makes them timorous and fearful in wars, by reason their wife and i will∣drone may be ruined by their death. Also it makes them dull in their Con∣versations,
by reason they are always plodding for their worldly affairs; and for the Muses, had a husband time to entertain them, yet the wife would right them, or drive them from him, with their quarrelling disputes, or senseless prizes; besides most women are as jealous of the Muses, as of their Maids; but to treat or discourse of married women, is to discourse of a most unhappy life, for all the time of their lives is ensnared with troubles, what in breeding and bearing children, what in taking and turning away Ser∣vents, directing and ordering their Family, counting their expenses, and dis∣bursing their revenues, besides the vexations with their servants, for their quarrelling and combining, for their sloth and sluttery, for their spoils and carlessnesse, for their treachery and cousinage, and if they have Children, what troubles and griefs do unsue? Troubled with their frowardness and un∣towardness, the care for their well being, the fear for their ill doing, their grief for their sickness, and their unsufferable sorrow for their death; Yet this is the best part, and not to be avoided: But if these troubles be joined with an ill Husband, it heightens their torments; for if he be a Drunkard, she had better be married to a Beast, her nostrils is stencht with the Lees of wine, her eyes are offended with his rude behaviour, and her ears are struck with a cursed noise of cursing and Oaths; and if he be a Gamester, she lives in an unsettled condition, she knows not how soon she may want; for if she have plenty one day, she may be in a condition to beg the next. And if her Hus∣band be inconstant, and loves variety of women: O how jealousy torments her, besides the wrongs she suffers from him! what affronts she receives from his Mistress! How is she despised amongst her neighbours? slighted by her servant, suspected by the world for having some defect? as either to be in∣continent, sluttish, foolish, froward, cross, unkind, ill natured, sickly, or dis∣eased, when perchance the woman may be worthy to be marched with a tem∣pirate, wise, valiant, honest, rich and honourable man; and if women go fine, and take pleasure in themselves, and Garments, their Husbands are jea∣louse; and if they regard not themselves or Garments, their Husbands dislikes them; For though men will swear to their wives they like them better in their old clothes, than other women in their glorious Apparel; because they would not have them expensive, yet if their wives neglect themselves, regarding not their dressing, but sleights all outward Adornments, and change of Garments as prodigal spend-thrifts, they starve their Husbands esteem in their thrifty plainness, Consumes their affections in their peiced Petti∣coats, and buries their Husbands love in their dirty rags; And from the Dunghill of dirty rags, and grave of soul Linen, is their Husbands transfor∣med to beastly Adulteries, stealing by degrees out of one Form into another, as from a doting Husband, to a fond Husband, form a fond to a discreet Hus∣band, from a discreet, to a careful Husband, from a careful, to a careless, from a careless, to a disliking, from a disliking, to a hating, and then they be∣gin to wander; As first, an eye glances, from an eye glance, to an admirer; from an admirer, to a professor, from a professor, to a dissembler; from a dissembler, to an Adulterer; then for the dresses and garments of his Mistress, First, from clean, to new; from new, to fine; from fine, to brave; from brave, to glorious; from glorious to fantastical; from fantastical to profusely vari∣os from profusely, various to any dirty Slut. But his wife (on the other side, if his wife desires) appears handsome, and practises civil behaviour, and endeavours to be sine, takes care to be cleanly, observes to be fashionable, her
Husband straight becomes jealous, although she doth this for his sake, and to keep his affection, yet he thinks it is for the affection and sake of some other man, which causes private discontents, from private discontents to quarrelling disputes; from quarrelling disputes, to public exclamations, from public exclamations, to open defiance; from open defiance, to devorcement; and though I cannot say this by, or from experience, having it only from re∣lotion, yet I do as faithfully believe it, as if I were experienced therein: On which faith, I made a vow never to marry, since I hear men are so hard to please, and apt to change; wherefore if I were married, instead of discoursing of several arguments, I should be groaning and sighing, and weep∣ing, with several pains and vexations; and instead of a silent solitary contem∣plation, a clamorous quarrelsome conversation; instead of a peaceable life, I should be always in civil wars; and instead of being happy, I should be mi∣serable; for marriage is like a ship, which always lies on the roughest Belows of the Sea, rolling from side to side with discontents, sailing uncertainly, with inconstancy, and various winds, But noble, civil, kind and affectionate Gentle∣men, as I have told you, I have made a vow never to marry, and surely mar∣riage is not so happy an estate, or so pleasing a condition of life, as to persuade me to break my vow, neither can flattering Rhetoric, nor enticing beauty, nor adoring, admiring, deploring, praying, weeping Suitors persuade me, no, not a bleeding Suitor, were I sure he would dye, did he not enjoy me; for I will never be so dishonourable, perjurious, and impious, to break the holy Laws, and pull the Virgin Altars down, built in the conscience, on which are vows offered to Gods on high: Should I blow out that with faint inconstan∣cy, that pure bright Vestal Fire of innocence, from whence the Essence of chaste thoughts ascends to Heaven high; But rather than I would break my vow, I wish my ears as deaf as death, that hears no flattering sounds, nor sad complaints, nor terrifying threats, my eyes as dark as night, least light should bring some false deluding object in, for to deceive me; my heart like Ada∣mant, so hard love cannot enter, nor pity nor compassion wound; but how∣soever, I connote be wife to you all; wherefore since I cannot be every mans wife, I will dye every mans Maid. But I must tell this Noble Assembly, their meeting hath occasioned a quarrel here; for bashfulness, and confi∣dence hath fought a Duel in my Cheeks, and left the staines of blood there.
WHilst I was in his favour, my mind was like a pleasant Garden, where seve∣ral Fancies like several Birds, did make sweet melody; and in this Gar∣den a large, high Tree of Noble ambition grew; whereon hung fruits of hopes, but low misfortunes now hath cut it down, and therewithal have built a house, where melancholy dwells, darkened with Clouds of discontents, and winds of sighs, and show∣ers of tears, doth blow and power thereon.
Faith you will be well wived, for your assianced is known to be a Liar, and feared she will be a Whore, and proved a Thief.
How, a Thief?
Why, she hath stolen my Pearl Chain worth a thousand Pounds.
Tic impossible.
It is not impossible to prove a Thief.
No, for there is too many to miss; but sure it is impose∣sible she should prove one, she is so honourably born, and I never heard but she was Virtuously bred.
By your favour, Covetousness or Necessity, may tempt Honourable Births, and corrupt minds, that with plenty would be honest e∣nough.
I grant, misery may prove some Noble souls sprung from Honourable stocks, yet not to be so wickedly base as to steal, although so un∣worthy as to shark.
Why, sharking is next Neighbour to stealing, or as near Kindred as an Equivocation is to a Lye.
But she was never so necessitated, as to make her either a shark, or a Thief, having always plenty.
But she is covetous, and youth that is fond of all things they see, desires to enjoy all things they have not, and will endeavour by any means or ways to compass their desires.
I never found my Youth prompt to any such Acts.
Without more discourse, she hath stole my Chain, and I can prove it.
Tic strange, I know not what to think, or how to judge, which of the two Ladies is a Devil; for surely one of them is.
The Lady Sanspareile is the miracle of this age, the world doth not parrallel her with the like; for her behaviour is graceful and becoming, her Countenance modest and wife, her speech Majestic and witty, yet grave and learned, and her Oratory is after a New way.
It is reported, that there are many men come from all parts of the world to hear her, and those that cannot understand this Language, comes only to see her, so famous is she to all the world.
She is a great Honour to our Nation.
I hear she doth intend to plead in the behalf of poor Suitors, and hath asked leave of the Queen to be a pleader at the Barr, for all such as suf∣feared wrong as injustices, and for such Clients as hath just causes, but hath not means to follow the Law, as to see the Lawyers, &amp; she will plead for them gratis.
It is a pious and Noble Act.
Also her Father hath challenged all the eloquent Orators of our Nation, to make Orations extemporately; likewise he hath challenged the most famous Scholars and learned men to dispute with her.
Her Father is most dotingly fond of her.
He hath reason, and out of love to her he is building a very fine Library, to lay in all her Works; for they say she writes much, and hath writ many excellent Works.
She deserves a Statue for her self, as well as a Library for her Works.
Madam, my Lord and the Lady Incontinent hath sent me to tell you, you must come to be examined about the Chain.
I am so shrunk up with fear, that methinks I could thrus• my self into a Nut-shell to hide myself.
Faith if you could, it would not conceal you; for they would crack the Nut-shell and find you out.
The Lady Incontinent hath brought a Justice, who hath power to make you confess.
You may perceive her guilty, she trembles and shakes &amp; looks so pale.
Pray judge me not guilty by my countenance, bring it not as a witness against me, for the childish fears in my heart, causes a trem∣bling, which like an Earthquake, shakes my body, and makes my breath as pent up Air, that pants for passage, striving to get forth, and my innocent bash∣fullness, or my bashful innocence, makes my eyes like perturbed lights, that see nothing clearly; my words to flow like rough and broken streams; for my mind is so troubled, and my passions in such a storm, as my words can nei∣there flow easy, nor free.
Here be two that will witness that she stole the Chhain.
I will swear she took the Chain of Pearl, and put it in her pose∣ket, and so went out of the room with it.
Why did not you follow her, and take it from her.
I thought she would bring it again, for I never suspected she would deny it.
And will you witness the same Informer?
I will witness I saw it in her hand, looking on it.
What say you for your self Lady Innocence?
I say my accusements doth not make me guilty of a crime; but I confess I took the Chain in my hand, out of a curiosity, and trial of my judgment or skill, to see whether I could find any defect, in so much valued, esteemed, and high-prized a thing as Pearl; but not any ways out of a cove∣ton; Appetite, as to steal it, nor had I any tempting thoughts thereto, nor wished I that or the like should be lawfully given me.
What did you with it, when you had done viewing it?
I laid it on the Table from whence I took it off.
But here are those that will swear you carried it away with you.
Yes that we will.
I cannot always avoid a false accusation.
Will you swear you did not?
Yes, If my Oath will be taken.
Well, you did take it that is certain, wherefore you were best confess it, or you shall be wrecked to make you confess it.
I will never bear false-witness against my self; I will dye first.
My Lord, pray let her be carried away, and be whipped, until the be forced to confess it.
Let me killed first: for to be whipped is base, and is only fit for Gally-slaves, or those that are born from Slaves; but to be killed is Noble, and gives an Honourable triumph.
Young Lady, you are heer accused by two Witnesses, and unless you can bring Evidence to clear you, you are liable to punishment.
Truly Sir, I have but two invisible Witnesses, Conscience and Innocence, to plead for me, and Truth my Judge, who cannot be bribed, although it may be over-powr'd, by false and slanderous reports.
But it is imagined by your best friends, you are guilty.
Neither my friends, nor enemies, can create me a Crime∣nal, with their Imaginations.
But speak, are you guilty?
To what purpose should I speak? for what can I say to those that make it their delight to accuse, condemn, and execute? or what justice can I expect to have, where there is no equity? wherefore, to plead were a folly, when all hopes are cut off; to desire life, a double misery, if I must endure Torments; but silence, and patience, shall be my two Comp∣nions, the one to help me in my suffering, the other to cut of impertinen∣cies.
What think you Justice, is she guilty?
Why should you make a question, when it hath been proved by Witnesses? Come Justice, Come, and drink a Cup of Sack, and give your opinion then.
I am so confidently accused of this Theft, as I am half per∣swaded I did take the Chain, but that Honour and Honesty says I did not.
Where is your Mistress? the people do flock about the house to see her, as I think they will pull it upon my head if she shows not her self to them, wherefore call her.
Come, Come Child, there are such expectations without for thee; but what makes thee to look so heavy?
Truly Sir, I am not well.
Not well? Heaven bless thee; where art thou Sick?
I cannot say I am very sick, or in any great pain; but I find a general alteration in me, as it were a fainting of spirits.
Prithee say not so, thou dost so affright me; but thou art not very sick, art thou?
I hope I shall be better Sir.
My dear Child go to bed, whilst I send for some Doctors to thee.
TO whom shall I power out my sad complaint? for all do them a Melan∣choly mind. O Gods! how willingly would I be buried in the grave with dust, and feast the worms, rather than live amongst mankind! Oh! Oh! that these Melancholy damps arising from my afflicted Soul could extinguish the Lamp of life, or that my sad and grieved thoughts that feed upon my troubled Spirits, could bite with sorrows teeth, the thread of life asunder.
My sweet Mistress, why do you weep?
The spring of grief doth send forth streams of tears to wash off my disgrace, and the foul spots which slandring tongues have stained, or rather slain my reputation; for which my eyes, did they not weep, would seem unnaturally unkind; but my dead reputation is embalmed with salt tears, bitter groans, shrouded in sorrows, and entombed in misery.
My dear Lady, you are embalmed with the precious gums of
Virtue, and sweet spices of wit wrapped up in youth and beauty, and are entomb∣ed, or rather enthroned in honest hearts; wherefore waste not your self with grief; for certainly the world will condemn your Accusers, and not you.
Those feeble hopes cannot my spirits uphold, they give no light of comfort to my mind; for black despair, like Melancholy night, mustles my thoughts, and makes my Soul as blind. O but why do I thus mourn in sad complaints, and do not curse Fortune, Fates, and destiny, their Wheels, there spindel, threads, and Chains?
May Nature great, turn all again to nought,
That nothing may with joy receive a thought.
She is deeply Melancholy, Heavens ease her mind.
The Lady Sanspareile cannot live, for the hath no pulse.
No, she is descending to the grave.
But had we best tell her Father so?
No, by no means as yet.
Why not? he will know when she is dead.
Mr. Doctors, What, do you mean to let my Daugh∣la dye? will you not prescribe something to give her?
Madam, we shall do our best, you may be confident.
What if you prescribed a Glister, or a Purge?
I shall not need Madam.
Why, if any one be sick, they ought to have some re∣medies applied to them:
We shall consider what course is best to be taken.
For Gods sake do not neglect her.
Mr. Doctors, what is your opinion of my Daughter?
Truly Sir, she is very dangerous sick.
I can find no pulse she hath.
Nor we Sir, that makes us doubt her.
Pray consult about her what is best to be done.
We shall Sir.
What makes you look so ghastly pale?
I am so ashamed of my accusation, as my bashfulness is beyond all blushing, as greatest griefs are beyond all tears, it causes my limbs to tremble, face look pale, like Death's assault, making my courage fail.
Perchance you are ashamed to confess so base a crime; you may confess to me, for I shall strive to hide your faults, and cover them with some excuse; wherefore confess; for though it be a fault to steal, yet it is a double fault to hide it with a Lye, and by these crimes you do offend the Gods; nor will their anger be removed, unless you confess and ask pardon.
Your Doctrine is very good, and Application well apply∣ed, had I been Guilty; but being Innocent, they are vainly uttered.
I hope you will agree to resign the interest you have to me, if I should desire you.
Saints never offred up their Souls to God more willingly, than I all interest to you; not but that I love you, yet I should be loath to be bound to one that hath so ill an opinion of me, as you have.
The World would condemn me, if I should marry you, to stain my Posterity with your Crimes.
O Heavens, is my scandal of so deep a dye, as to stain Pre∣decessors and Posterity! yours may avoid it, but my Predecessors are spot∣ted all over.
I cannot choose but love her, although I fear she is guilty; but I perceive she is resolved not to confess, as being ashamed of it.
Let spotless Virgins bear me to my grave, and holy An∣thems sing before my Hearse, and soft-toucht Instruments to play the while, and keep just time with tears, that trickling fall from the sad eyes of my most sorrowful friends; and one my Coffin spread upon a covering of smooth Satin, white, to signify here how I lived a Virgin, pure I lived and die∣ed; and let my works which I have wrought, and spun out of my brain, be given to times Library, to keep alive my name.
And set a Lilly-Garland on my Hearse,
On every leaf therein, stick on a verse;
And when my Coffin to the grave you bring,
Let Poets on my Hearse some verses fling.
For whilst I lived I worshipped Nature great,
And Poets are by Nature savoured.
I in the Muses Arms desire to Dye,
For I was bred up in their Company:
And my requesl's to them, when I am dead,
I may amongst them be remembered.
But death draws near, my destiny is come; Father farewell: may time take up my years, which death cuts off, and add them to your life: Peace keep your mind, and Comfort give you rest.
But why do you weep dear Father? my life's not worth your tears; yet Heavens doe weep, and mingle with dull earth their Crystal streams, and earth's refreshed thereby; so is not death, for death is ever dry.
O Child! O Child! my heart will break.
Sir, why do you sigh and groan, and grieve, that I must dye? life is perpetual, and death is but a change of shape.
Only I wish that Death may order it so,
That from your roots I may your flower grow.
I fear not Death, nor am I loath to dye:
Yet I am loath to leave your Company.
But O the Muses stay my dying lips to close. Farewell
What art thou sted? dear Soul wheredost thou go? stay and I will bear thee Company.
Where art thou Soul? why make thou such great haste? I pray thee stay, and take thy aged Fathers Soul along with thee, left it should wander in the dark and gloomy shades to find thee out. O! O death! quick dispatch, Let me unprisoned be, my body is old, decayed and worn, times ruins shows it. Oh! Oh! let life fall, for pity pull it down.  Am I not dead? you cruel powers above, to lengthen out an old mans life in misery and pain; why did not Time put out the sight of both my eyes, and also deaf my ears, that I might neither hear, nor see, the death of my lifes joy? O Luxurious Death, how greedily thou feedst on youth and beauty, and lie old Age hang withering on lifes tree? O shake me off, let me no longer grow, if not, grief shall by force snip off my tender stalk, and pity lay me in the silent grave. Hark, Hark, I hear her call me? I come, I come Child.
O no, she is gone, she is gone, I saw her dead; her head hung down, like as a Lily, whose stalk was broke by some rude blusterous wind.
There, there I see her on her duteous knee; Her humble eyes cast to the ground; Her spotless hands held up for blessings crave, asking forgiveness for faults not done. O no, She is dead! She is dead! I saw her eye-lids close
like watery Clouds, which join to shut out the bright Sun; and felt her hands which Death made cold and numb, like as to Crystal balls; She is gone, she is gone, and restless grows my mind; thoughts strive with thoughts, &amp; struggle in my brain, passions with passions in my heart make War.
My Spirits run like suries all about;
Help help for Heavens sake, and let life out.
O my daughter! my daughter is dead, she is dead. Oh that ever I was born to bear a Child to dye before me. Oh she was the Comfort of my Heart, the pleasure of my Eyes, the delight of my life. Oh she was Good, she was Sweet, she was Fair. O what shall I do, what shall I do?
Mercury lend me thy winged feet, that I may fly to Heaven, there to observe, how all the Gods and Goddesses doe gaze upon my Beautiful Child; for she is fairer than the light that great Apollo gives; and her discourse more ravishing than the Music of the Spheres; but as soon as she sees me, she will leave them all, and run unto me, as she used to do, kneeling will kiss my hands, which she must not do, being a Goddess, and I a Mortal, wherefore, I must kneel to her, and carry her an offering; but what shall the offering be? Let me think. Why I will kneel and offer up my Aged life unto her Memory; but now I think of it better, I cannot dye in Heaven; wherefore, let me Study, let me Study, what she did love best when she lived upon the Earth; O I now remember, when I did ask her what she loved best, she would Answer, her Father and her Fame; but I believe, if she were here it would be a hard Question for her to resolve, which she preferred; and being not to be separated in Affection, we will not part in our Resurrection; wherefore Mercury farewell: for I will fly up with the Wings of her good Fame.
And carry up her Wit, and there will strew
It on Heavens floor, as bright as Stars will show;
Her Innocence shall make new Milky ways,
Her Virtue shall Create new Worlds to praise
Her never-dying Name.
Ha, Ho! It shall be so, it shall be so.
I am not so much in love with the World, as to desire to live, nor have I offended Heaven so much, as to be afraid to dye; then way should I prolong my life, when Honour bids me dye? for what Noble Soul had not rather part with the Body, than live in Infamy? Then tic not Death that affrights me, and yet I find my Soul is loath to leave its bodily Mansion; but O to be buried in Oblivions grave is all I fear; no Monumental Fame, nor famous Monument, my Soul displeases, that makes it loath to leave the body in forgotten dust, whilst it doth sadly wander in the Air.
Soul be at ease, for the Memory of the dead is but like a dying Beauty, vades by degrees, or like a Flower whithered, hath neither Sent, Colour, nor Taste, but molders into dust: so hath the mind no form of what is past.
But like as formless heaps those Objects lye,
And are entombed in the dark Memory.
O Foolish Vanity, to be so much a slave to Fame, since those that Fame doth love the best, and favours most, are not Eternal. Wherefore
Nature persuades me to release my woe,
Though foolish Superstition Natures foe
Forbids it, yet Reason aloud says dye;
Since Ease, Peace, Rest, doth in the grave still lye.
I am resolved, then Come sweet Death, thou friend that never fails, give me my liberty. But stay my hasty resolution; for I would not willingly go to the grave as beasts doe, without Ceremony; for I being friendless, those hue∣mane Funeral rites will be neglected, none will take the pains, nor be at the charge to see them performed; but some base vulgar person will throw me into the Earth without respect or regard; wherefore I will Living perform the Ceremonies, and as a guess or friend be at my own Funeral; it shall be so, and I will prepare it.
Multitudes of Melancholy thoughts crowd in my brain,
And run to pull down Reason from his Throne;
Fury as Captain leads the way,
Patience and Hope is trod upon:
O these distracted thoughts burrie my Soul about,
Seeking a place to get a passage out.
But all the Ports are stopped. O Cursed Death, for to prolong a life that is so weary of its Mansion.
Sir, will you give order for your Daughters Funeral, and direct how you will have her interred?
How say you? why I will have you rip my body open, and make it as a Coffin to lay her in, then heave us gently on sighs fetched deep, and lay us on a Hearse of sorrowful groans, then cover us with a Dark, Black, Pitchy, Spungy Cloud, made of thick Vapour, drawn from bleeding hearts; from whence may tears of showers run pouring down, making a Sea to drown remembrance in.
But O remembrance, is a fury grown,
Torments my Soul, now she is gone.
Sir, where there is no remedy, you must have patience.
Patience, out upon her, she is an Idle lazy Gossip, and keep; none Company but Cowards and Fools, and slothful conscientious Persons; neither is she useful but for indifferent employments: for what is of extraordi∣nary worth, Patience doth but disgrace it, not set it forth; for that which is transcendent and Supreme, Patience cannot reach. Wherefore give me Fury, for what it cannot raise to Heaven, it throws it straight to Hell; were you no∣ver there?
No, nor I hope shall never come there.
Why Sir, I was there all the last Night, and there I was tor∣tured for chiding my Daughter two or three times whilst she lived; once because she went in the Sun without her Mask; another time because her Gloves were in her Pocket, when they should have been on her Hands; and another time, because she slep'd when she should have studied, and then I remember she wept. O! O! those precious tears! Devil that I was to grieve her sweet Nature, harmless Thoughts, and Innocent Soul. O how I hate my self, for being so unnaturally kind. O kill me, and rid be of my painful life.
He is much distracted, Heaven cure him.
The Miracle is deceased, the Lady Sanspareile I hear i• dead.
Yes, and it's reported her Statue shall be set up in every College, and in the most public places in the City, at the public charge; and the Queen will build a Sumptuous and Glorious Tomb on her sleeping Ashes.
She deserves more than can be given her.
I hear her death hath made her Father mad.
Though her death hath not made every one mad like her Father, yet it hath made every one melancholy; for I never saw so general a sadness in my life.
There is nothing moves the mind to sadness, more than when Death divots Youth, Beauty, Wit, and Virtue all at once.
There is a Hearse placed upon the Stage, covered with black, a Garland of Cyprus at the head of the Hearse, and a Garland of Myrtle at one side, and a Basket of Flowers on the other.
O Nature, thou hast created bodies and minds subject to pains &amp; torments, yet thou hast made death to release them! for though Death hath power over Life, yet Life can command Death when it will; for Death dares not stay, when Life would pass away; Death is the Ferry∣man, and Life the Wastage.
But here great Nature, I do pray to thee,
Though I call Death, let him not cruel be:
Great Jove I pray, when in cold earth I lye,
Let it be known how innocent I die.
Here in the midst my sadder Hearse I see;
Covered with black, though my chief Mourners be,
Yet I am white, as innocent as day,
As pure as spotless Lilies born in May;
My loose and flowing hair with Ribbons tied,
To make Death Amorous of me, now his Bride;
Watchet for truth, hair-colour for despair,
And white as innocent as purest Ayre;
Scarlet for cruelty to stop my breath,
Darkening of Nature, black, a type of death.
Roses and Lilies about my Coffin strew,
Primroses, Pinks, Violets fresh and new:
And though in deaths cold arms anon I lye 
I'll weep a shower of tears these may not dye,
A Cyprus Garland here is for my head,
To crown me Queen of Innocence, when dead;
A Myrtle Garland on the left side placed,
To show I was a Lover; pure &amp; chaste;
Now all my saddest Rites being thus about me,
And I have not one wish that is without me.
Here on this Hearse I mount the Throne of death,
Peace crown my soul, my body rest on earth:
Yet before I dye,
Like to a Swan I will sing my Elegy.
Life is a trouble at the best,
And in it we can find no rest;
Joys still with sorrows they are Crowned,
No quietness till in the ground.
Man vexes man, still we do find,
He is the torture of his kind:
False man I scorn thee in my grave
Death come, I call thee as my slave.
Here ends my Lords Writing.
I will observe how she passes away her time, when she is alone.
Great Jove grant that the light of Truth may not be put out, with the extinguisher of Malice.
How she feeds her melancholy!
What are you acting a melancholy Playby your self alone?
My part is almost done.
By Heaven she hath stabbed her self.
Call not for help, life is gone so far tic past recovery; wherefore stay and hear my last words; I die, as judging it unworthy to out-live my honest Name, and honourable Reputation. As for my accusers, I can easily forgive them, because they are below my Hate or Anger, neither are worthy my revenge; But you, for whom I had not only a devout, but an Idolatrous Affection, which offered with a zealous Piety and pure Flame the sincerity of my heart; But you, instead of rewarding my Love, was cruel to my life and Honour, for which my soul did mourn under a Veil of sad∣ness, and my thoughts covered with discontent sate weeping by: But those mourning Thoughts I have cast off, clothing my self with Deaths pale Gar∣mints; As for my pure Reputation, and white Simplicity, that is spotted with black Infamy by Hellish slander, I have laid them at Heavens Gates, just Gods to scour them clean, that all the World may know how innocent I have been: But Oh! farewell, my fleeting Spirits pure Angels bear a∣way.
O speak at the last! Are you guilty or not?
I am no more guilty of those crimes laid to my charge, than Heaven is of sin.
O Gods receive me. Oh! Oh!
Great Patience assist me; Heart hold life in,
Till I can find who is guilty of this sin.
How are you now?
O Friend! I shall now be well, Heaven hath pity on me, and will release me soon; and if my Daughter be not buried, I would have her kept as long out of the Grave as she can be kept, that I might bear her company.
She cannot be kept longer, because she was not unbowelled.
Who speaks her Funeral Oration?
Why Sir, your distemper hath so disordered all your Family, as it was not thought of.
She shall not go to the Grave without due Praises, if I have life to speak them: Wherefore raise me up, and carry me to the Holy place before her Hearse, thus in my Chair, sick as I am; For I will speak her Few∣neral Oration, although with my last words, Thus will I be carried living to my Grave.
When I do think of her, my mind is like a tempestu∣os Sea, which foams and roars, and roles in Billows high; My brain like to a Ship is wrecked, and in it's ravenous Waves my heart is drowned; And as several winds do blow, so several thoughts do move; some like the North with cold and chilly Fears, others as from the South of hot Re∣avenge do blow;
As from the East despairing storms do rise,
A Western grief blows tears into mine eyes.
My Lord, why are you so melancholy for that which is past, and cannot be helped?
Oh! the remembrance of her death, her cruel death, is like the Infernal Furies, torments my soul, gives it no case nor rest; For some∣times my soul is flung into a Fire of Rage,
That burns with furious pain,
And then with frozen despair it rips it up again.
But I unjust and credulous, I was the cause of her untimely death.
O my Lord, forgive me, for I have murdered the innocent La∣die you grieve for; for my false Accusation was the hand that guided the dag∣ger to her heart; but my Ladies command was the Thief that stole the Chain, for she commanded me to take the Chain, and accuse the Lady of the Theft, for which she gave me the Chain for a reward; This I will wit∣ness by oath unto you and all the World; For it is heavier than a world up∣on my Conscience.
Why did your Lady so wicked an act?
Through Jealousy, which bred Envy, Envy Malice, Malice Slander, and this Slander hath produce Murder.
Oh my Lady! My Lady hath hanged her self; for when she heard Falsehood was gone to tell your Lordship the truth of the Chain, she went into a base place and hung her self; and upon her breast I found this written Paper.
It is the Lady Incontinents Hand-writing.
I have been false to my Marriage-bed, lived impudently in the sin of Adultery,
in the public face of the World; I have betrayed the trust imposed to my charge, standered the Innocent, poisoned the Instrument I employed, Falsehood. All which being summed up, was worthy of hanging.
She hath saved me a labour, and kept my Heroic Ho∣nor free from the stains of having laid violent hands on the Effeminate Sex.
What shall be done with this dead Body?
Let her Ladies body, with hers, be thrown into the Fields, to be devoured of Beasts.
spotless Virgins as you go,
Wash each step as white as Snow,
With pure Crystal streams, that rise
From the Fountain of your eyes.
Fresher Lilies like the day
Strew, and Roses as white as they;
As an Emblem to disclose
This Flower sweet; short lived as those.
The whilst her Father is carried as sick in a Chair, the Chair covered with black, and born black by Mourners, he himself also in close Mourning; when they have gone about the Stage.
Then the Father is placed in his Chair, upon a raised place for that purpose, the raised place also covered with Black; he being placed, speaks her Few∣neral Sermon.
Most Charitable and Noble Friends, that accompany the Dead Corps to the Grave, I must tell you, I am come here, although I am as a Dead Man to the World, yet my desire is to make a living Speech, before I go out of the world, not only to divulge the Affections I had for my Daugh∣la, but to divulge her Virtue, Worth, and good Graces; And as it is the cu∣stome for the nearest Kindred, or best and constantest Friends, or longest ac∣quaintance, to speak their Funeral Oration, wherein I take my self to be all,
wherefore most fit to speak her Funeral Oration; For I being her Father, am her longest acquaintance, and constantest Friend, and nearest in Relation, wherefore the, fittest to declare unto the world my natural and Fatherly Love, Death will be a sufficient witness; For though I am old, yet I was health∣full when she lived, but now I cannot live many hours, neither would I, for Heaven knows, my affections struggle with Death, to hold Life so long as to pay the last Rites due to her dead Corps, struck by Death's cruel Dart: But most Noble and Charitable Friends, I come not here with eye filed with sal• tears; for sorrows thirsty Jaws hath drunk them up, sucked out my blood, &amp; left my Veins quite dry, &amp; luxuriously hath eat my Marow out; my sighs are spe•t in blowing out Life's Fire, only some little heat there doth remain, which my affections strive to keep alive to pay the last Rites due to my dead Child, which is, to set her praises forth, for living Virtuously; But had I Nestors years, it would prove too few, to tell the living Stories of her Youth, for Nature in her had packed up many Piles of Experience, of Aged times, be∣sides, Nature had made her Youth sweet, fresh and temperate, as the Spring; and in her brain, Flowers of Fancies grew, Wits Garden set by Natures hand, wherein the Muses took delight, and entertained themselves therein, Singing like Nightingales, late at Night; or like the Larks ere the day begin; Her thoughts were as the Celestial Orbs, still moving circular without back ends, surrounding the Center of her Noble mind, which as the Sun gave light to all about it; her Virtues twinkled like the fixed Stars, whose mo∣tion stirs them not from their fixed place; and all her Passions were as other stars, which seemed as only made to beautify her Form; But Death hath turned a Chaos of her Form, which life with Art and Care had made, and Gods had given to me: O cursed death, to rob and make me poor! Her life to me was like a delightful Mask, presenting several interchanging Scenes, de∣scribing Nature in her several Dresses, and every Dress put in a several wa•• Also her life was like a Monarchy, where Reason as sole King, did govern al her actions; which actions, like as Loyal Subjects did obey those Laws which Reason decreed; Also her life was like Ioves Mansions high, as being placed above this worldly Globe; from whence her Soul looked down on duller earth, mixed not, but viewed poor mortals here below; thus was her life a∣bove the world, because her life prized not the Trifles here; Perchance this Noble Company will think I have said too much, and vainly, thus to speak.
That Fathers should not praise their Children so,
Because that from their Root and Stock did grow;
Why may not Roots boast if their Fruits be good?
As hindering worth in their own Flesh and blood,
Shall they dissemble, to say they are nought,
Because they are their own? sure that's a fault
Unpardonable, as being a lye that's told,
Detracting lies, the baser lies I hold.
Neither can strangers tell their life and worth,
Nor such affections have to set them forth,
As Parents have, or those thats near of Kin,
Virtuous Partiality, sure that's no sin,
And virtue, though she be lovliest when undressed
Yet she is pleased, when well she is expressed.
But Oh! my words have spent my stock of breath,
And Life's commanded forth by powerful Death;
When I am dead, this company I pray,
The last rites done, me by my daughter lay;
And as her soul did with the Muses fly,
To imitate her in her a verse, I dye.
Noble Friends, you heard his request, which was; to be bu∣riot in his daughters grave; and whilst you show your charity, in laying the Corps of his daughter in the grave, I will carry out his body, and put it into a Coffin, and then lay him in the same grave.
The whilst the Virgins take up the Lady Sanspareiles Hearse, and whilst they are putting it into the grave, this Song following was sung.
Tender Virgins, as your Birth,
Put her gently in the earth,
What of Moral, or Divine,
Here is lapped up in this shrine;
Rhetoric dumb Philosophy,
Both those arts with her did dye.
And grieved Poets cannot choose,
But lament for her their Muse.
When she was putting into the Grave, this Song following was sung.
Her Tomb, her Monument, her Name,
Beyond an Epitaph her Fame;
Death be not proud, embracing more
Now, than in all thy reign before;
Boasting thy Triumphs, since thou must
But justly glory in her dust,
Let thy Dart rust, and lay it by,
For after her none's sit to dye.
Now I am free, no hinderance to my own Tragedy.
This Tomb her sacred Body doth contain.
Dear Soul, pardon my crimes to thee; they were crimes of ignorance, n•• malice.
Sweet gentle Spirit•, fly me not, but stay,
And let my Spirits walk thy Spirits way;
You loved me once, your Love in death renew,
And may our souls be as two Lovers true;
Our Blood's the Bonds, our wounds the Seals to Print
Our new Contract, and Death a witness in it.
Had I as many lives as Poors in skin,
He sacrifice them for my ignorant sin.
I did fear this, which made me follow him, but I am come too late to save his life. O my Lord speak if you can!
Friend, lay me in this Tomb, by my affianced Wife; for though I did not usher her to the grave, I will wait after her.
Noble Spectators, now you have seen this Play,
And heard it speak, let's hear what now you say;
But various judgements, various sentences give,
Yet we do hope you'll sentence it may live.
But not in Prison be condemned to lye,
Nor whipped with censure, rather let it dye
Here on this Stage, and see the Funeral Rites,
Which is, to put out all the Candle lights.
And in the grave of darkness let it rest,
In peace and quiet, and not molest
The harmless soul, which hopes Mercury may
Unto the Elizium fields it safe convey.
But if you sentence life, the Muses will
Attend it up unto Parnassus Hill.
If so, pray let your hands, here in this place,
Clap it, as an applause, the triumph grace.

What Lady Contemplation, musing by your self alone?
Lady Visitant, I would you had been ten miles off, rather than to have broken my Contemplation.
Why, are you so godly, to be so serious at your Devo∣tion?
No faith, they were Contemplations that pleased me better than Devotion could have done; for those that contemplate of Heaven, must have death in their mind.
O no, for there is no Death in Heaven to disturb the joys thereof.
But we must dye before we come to receive those joys; and the terrifying thoughts of Death, take away the pleasing thoughts of Hey∣ven.
Prithee let me know those pleasing thoughts.
I did imagine my self such a Beauty, as Nature never made the like, both for Person, Favour, and Colour, and a Wit answerable to my Beauty, and my Breeding and Behaviour answerable to both, my Wisdom excelling all: And if I were not thus as I say, yet that every one should think I were so; for opinion creates more, and perfecter Beauties, than Nature doth. And then that a great powerful Monarch, such a one as Alexander, or Caesar, fell desperately in love with me, seeing but my Picture, which was sent all about the world; yet my Picture (I did imagine) was to my disad∣vantage, not flattering me any ways; yet this Prince to be enamoured with this shadow for the substance sake: Then Love persuaded him to send me his Picture, which represented him to the life, being extremely handsome, yet had a manly and wise countenance. This Picture being brought by Em∣bassadours, which Ambassadors when they came, treated with me about marriage with this sole Emperor, all other Kings and Princes being but Tri∣butteries; receiving these Ambassadors with great civility and respect, yet behaving my self with a reserved and Majestic behaviour, which the Em∣bassadours observing, said, I was the only Lady that was fit to be the only Emperors wife, both for my Beauty, Carriage, and Wit: When after a modest Fear, and seeming Humility, I had reasoned against the marriage, at last by their persuasion I consented; then was there Post after Post, and Mes∣senger after Messenger, sent with letters from the Emperor to me, and from me to the Emperor; he admiring my letters, for the elegance of the stile, and eloquence of the wit, and admiring my Picture for the beauty; one while
reading my letters, and another while viewing my Picture, made him imp∣tient for my Company, which made him send to his Ambassadors, that with all speed they should bring me away, sending to all the Princes whose King∣domes I was to pass thorough, that they should guard me with Armies, but not retard me with Olimpias, or the like, but to convey me safe and speedily: Whereupon I took my Journey (most of the Kingdom where I was born petitioning to wait on me); but by reason I could not take them all, unless I should depopulate the Kingdom, I would carry none, lest I should displease those that were to be left behind; but as I went out of the City where I dwelt, all the streets were strewed with dead Lovers, which had lived only on hopes, so long as I lived amongst them: But when they knew for certain I was to depart, their hopes vanished, and they dyed with despair. The Em∣bassadours seeing such a Mortality, caused the Army that was my guard to march apace, and my Coaches to trundle away, thinking it was the Plague; but at last, after my Beauty had killed millions in the Kingdoms I passed thorough, I arrived at that part of the world where the Emperor was, who was a joyed man to hear of my coming, and had made great preparations a∣against my arrival; but some few days before my arrival, he sent a Chariot which was made of the thinnest plated gold, because it should be light in the Carriage, but the body of the Chariot was enamelled and set with pre∣cious stones, the Horses trappings were only great Chains of pearls, but the horses reigns were Chains of gold, that might be strong enough to check their hot Spirits, and swift speed; as for my self, I was only clothed in white Sa∣tin, and a Crown of Diamonds on my head, like a Bride, for I was to be married as soon as I met the Emperor; but as I past along, all the High∣ways were beset with Crowds of people, which thronged to see me, and when they saw me, they cried out I was an Angel sent from the Gods; but your coming spoiled the Triumph, and brake the Marriage.
No. no it is retarded for a time, the next musing Contemplation the marriage Nuptial will be.
If you had not come and hindered me, I should have go∣ver'nd all the world before I had left off Contemplating.
But if you make such hast to be at the Government of the whole world, you would want a Theme for your thoughts to work upon, for you can aim at no more than all the world.
O yes, rather than fail I would make new worlds, but this will last me a long time in showing you what wise Laws I make, what upright Justice I give, ordering so, as the whole world should be as one united Fami∣lie; and when I had showed my wisdom in Peace, then my thoughts should have raised Wars, wherein I would have showed my valour and con∣duct.
Prithee be not so imprudent to cast away precious time, and to bury thy life in fantasms.
Why prithee, they manage time best, that please life most; For it were better not to be, than to be displeased; for there is none that true∣lie lives, but those that live in pleasure, &amp; the greatest pleasure is in the imagine∣tion not in fruition; for it is more pleasure for any person to imagine themselves Emperor of the whole world, than to be so; for in imagination they reign &amp; Rule, without the troublesome and weighty cares belonging thereto; neither have they those fears of being betrayed or usurped as real Emperors have;
Besides, the whole general Race of Man-kind, may this way be the particular Emperor of the whole World, if they will; but those that desire to be Emperors any other ways, have but sick judgements, for the mind is all, for is that be pleased, man is happy.
Well, well, I had rather have the Material world, than you Airy Fictions.— But confess really to me, if you should not think your self ac∣cursed if you were to have no other Lovers, but what your Fancy cre∣ates.
No truly, for I finding none so exact as my Fancy creates, makes all men appear worse than they are: For imagination doth like Pain∣ters, which takes all the gracefullest lines, and exactest Features from two or three good faces, and draws them into one: this is the reason that there may be handsomer Pictures drawn, than any Creature born; because, Nature di∣stributes and divides her Favours, as to the generality, when Painter contract them into particulars; for there was never any, unless born as a wonder, that hath no exceptions; besides, my Lovers which my Fancy cre∣ates, never make me jealous, nor never disturb me; come to me, and go from me; speak or are silent as I will have them, and they are behaved, qual∣fied, and adorned to my humour, also of what Birth, Age, Complexion, or Stature I like best; thus their persons and souls are created in my brain, live in my Contemplation, and are dead and buried in my forgetfulness, but have a Resurrection in my remembrance,
Prithee do not lose the pleasure of the World, for the sake of dull Contemplation.
Why, the greatest pleasures that can be in Fruition, I take in Imagination: for whatsoever the sense enjoys from outward objects, they may enjoy in inward thoughts. For the mind takes as much pleasure in cre∣ating of Fancies, as Nature to create and dissolve, and create Creatures anew: For Fancy is the Minds creature, &amp; imaginations are as several worlds, where∣in those Creatures are bred and born, live and dye; thus the mind is like infinite Nature.
Prithee leave thy infinite folly.
It is my infinite delight.
Madam, why do you weep, and grieve your self almost to death?
Have I not reason? my Father being killed, and I left friendless all alone, my Mother dying as soon as I was born.
There is no reason you should grieve for your Father, since he dyed in the defence of his King and Country.
Tic true, and I glory in his valiant loyal Actions, yet I cannot choose but mourn for the loss of his life, and weep upon his death.
Methinks the greatest cause you have to weep, is, for the loss of your Estate, which the Enemy hath seized on, and you left only to live on Charity.
I cannot mourn for any thing that is in Fortunes power to take away.
Why? Fortune hath power on all things in the World.
O no, she hath power on nothing but base dross, and outward forms, things moveable; but she hath neither power on honest hearts, nor noble Souls; for it is the Gods infuse grace, and virtue; nor hath she power or Reason, or Understanding, for Nature creates, and disposes those; nor doth she govern Wisdom, for Wisdom governs her; nor hath she power on Life and Death, they are decreed by Heaven.
And will you weep at Heavens decree?
The Heavens decrees hinder not humanity, nor natural af∣fection.
Well, ever since your Mother dyed, I have governed your Fa∣theirs House, and pleased him well; but since he is killed, and that there is nothing for me to govern, I will take my leave of you and seek another place; and I hope fortune will favour me so as to direct me to some Widower, or old Bachelor, which desires a comely huswifly woman to order their pri∣vate affairs.
I wish you all happiness, and if I were in a condition, I would make you a present.
Sir, My Lord is so busy since his Fathers Death, with Stewards, Attorneys, and such like, about ordering his Estate, as I am loath to disturb him; but as soon as he hath done speaking to them, I will wait upon you to my Lord.
Sir, I shall wait my Lords leisure.
Sir, what pretty young Lady is that which passes by?
She is a great Heiress, and was Ward to my old Lord, and he upon his Death-bed charged his Son my young Lord to marry her.
Surely small persuasions might serve turn; for her Virtue is Rhetoric enough to persuade, nay to force affection.
Yet my Lord is discontented, he would rather choose for him∣self, than that his Father should have chosen for him; for it is the Nature of Mankind to reject that which is offered, though never so good; and to prize that they cannot get, although not worth the having.
Of what Quality, of Birth, and Nature, and disposition is she of?
She is Honourably Born, and seems to be of a sweet disposition; but of a Melancholy Nature.
Sir, my Lord desires the Gentleman would be pleased to walk in.
Lady, what makes you so silently sad?
Pardon me Sir, I am not sad at this time, for my thoughts are merry, and my spirits lively.
There is no appearance of mirth in you, for mirth hath always a dancing heel, a singing voice, a talking tongue, and a laughing face.
I have such merry Companions sometimes; but I seldom dance, sing, talk, or laugh my self.
Where are those Companions? I desire to be acquainted with them, and keep them Company.
You cannot keep them Company, for the place they inhabit in, is too little for your Corporal body to enter; besides, they are so curious, choice, and nice Creatures, as they will vanish at the very sight of you.
Why Lady, I am none of the biggest sized Men, nor am I of a terrible aspect; I have seen very fine and delicate Creatures.
But you never saw any of these Creatures.
Pray where do they dwell, and what are their Names? I long to visit them.
They dwell in my head, and their Surnames are called thoughts; but how you will visit them I cannot tell, but they may visit you.
Faith Lady, your relation hath made me despair of an enter∣view, but not a friendly entertainment, if you please to think well of me.
Thoughts are free, and for the most part they censure according to fancy.
Then fancy me such a one, as you could like best, and love most.
That I cannot doe, for I love those best which I create my self, and Nature hath taught me to prize whatsoever is my own most, although of smaller value, than what's another, although of greater worth.
Then make me yours, by creating me anew.
That is past my skill; but if you will leave me alone, I will think of you when you are gone; for I had rather of the two entertain you in my thoughts, than keep you Company in discourse; for I am better pleased with a solitary silence, or a silent solitariness, than with a talking conversation, or
an entertaining talking, for words for the most part are rather useless spent, than profitably spoke, and time is lost in listening to them, for few tongues make Music, wanting the Cords of Sense, or sound of Reason, or singers of Fancy, to play thereon.
But you will injure your wit, to bury your wit in solitary silence.
Wit lives not on the tongue, as language doth, but in the brain, which power hath, as Nature, to create.
But those are aerie not material Creatures.
It is true, but what they want in substance, they have in variety; for the brain can create Millions of several Worlds filled full of several Cry∣tures, and though they last not long, yet are they quickly made, they need not length of time to give them form and shape.
But there is required Speech to express them, or they are made in vain, if not divulged.
Speech is an enemy to Fancy; for they that talk much, cannot have time to think much; and Fancies are produced from thoughts, as thoughts are from the mind, and the mind which doth create the thoughts, and the thoughts the fancies, is as a Deity; for it entertains it self with it self, and only takes pleasure in its own works, although none other should par∣take, or know thereof; but I shall talk a World out of my head, wherefore farewell.
Now your Estate is seized on, you have not means to keep a Servant, as to pay them for their service.
No truly Nan, but that which grieves me most, is, that I have not wherewithal to reward thee for thy past service.
I have served you these seven years, and have had nothing but my bare wages, unless it were some of the worst of your cast Clothes; for Mrs. Governess took order I should have none of the best; but I hope you will pay me my half years wages that is due to me.
Truly Nan I am not able, for not only my Estate, but all the Money, Jewels, Plate, and other goods you know was seized on, all that my Father left, or had a right to, unless it were my single self; and if you will take my service for half a year for payment, I will be very honest, dutiful, and diligent.
No by my troth, for you have been bred with so much at∣tendance, curiosity, and plenty, as you will rather prove a charge than a pay∣meant; but if you can get means by your youth, and beauty, I shall come and claim what is owing me.
When I am able you shall not need to challenge it; for I will pay you before you ask.
Why weepst thou old Humanity?
For the ruin of your noble family. I came a boy to your Grandmother the great and rich Lady Natures service, she being then newly married to your Grandfather the Lord Propriety; from whence sprung your Father the Lord Morality; your Grandfather, and Grandmother dying, I ser∣ved your Father, who soon after married your Mother the Lady Piety, they living, whilst she lived, with Peace and Tranquillity; but she dying, left you only to your Father, as a pledge of their loves; and indeed, you are so like them both, as all must confess they were your Parents, although they knew not your Birth; and yet none can tell which you resembled most: thus have I lived to see your Grandfather, and Grandmother, and Father, and Mother dead, and Peace, and Tranquillity fled; and you sweet Virtue left desolate and forlorn, both of friends and fortune; but sweet Lady comfort your self, for I have a little fortune, which I got honestly in your Fathers service; and as long as that lasts you shall not want.
I thank you, but you are old Humanity, and ready to go upon Crutches, and age and infirmities are shiftless; wherefore keep it for thy own use.
Why, so is unexperienced youth, both shiftless, and strength∣less.
Tic true, yet youth hath an increasing advantage; for time carries youth up, but time pulls Age down; wherefore I will not take that from thee, that will cause thee to be the poorer, or hazard you to want; I shall only desire your advise, what I shall do, and what course I shall follow.
Alas sweet Lady, necessity will drive you into many ex∣tremities.
I shall have fortitude to arm me; but what Counsel will you give me?
The best way for you will be to get into some great Ladies ser∣vice, and in such a place or office as to attend upon her Person, there you may live with honour and respect.
I had rather shrow'd my honest Poverty in a thatched house, than live in a Palace to be pointed at for my misfortunes; for in this Age, misfortunes are accounted crimes, and poverty is condemned as a thief, and hanged in the Chains of scorn; wherefore if I could get a service in an ho∣nest poor Farmers house, I might live happy, as being most obscure from the World, and the Worlds Vices; for vice increases more in Palaces than in Cottages; for in Palaces Pride Plows, Faction Sows, Riot Reaps, Extortion Threshes, Covetousness Whoords up the grain or gain; there youth is corrup∣ted with Vanity, Beauty caught with Flattery, Chastity endangered with Pow∣er, and Virtue slandered by Envy; besides, great Persons use their Servants too unequally, making them either Masters, or Slaves; where in an humble Cottage the industrious, and laborious Masters command their Servants friendly and kindly, and are obeyed with love; wherefore good Humanity, seek me out such a Place to live in, to serve.
I will, for I will never forsake you as long as I live, or at least so long as I have legs to go.
When you cannot visit me, I will visit you, for I shall never be ungrateful.
Sir Experience Traveller, you that have been so great a tra∣veller, pray tell me what Nations have the rarest Beauties, and which the greatest Wits?
In all my travels, the rarest Beauty that I have seen, and the greatest Wit that I have heard of, is your self, sweet Lady Con∣versation.
Then you have lost your labour; for you might have seen my Beauty, and have heard my Wit, at less Charges, and more ease.
Tic true Madam, had I only travelled to see a fair Lady, and hear a witty discourse.
Why, many travel to less purpose.
Tic true Madam, for some travel merely to learn to make a leg or congy with a good grace, and to wear their clothes, or acouster themselves fashionably. But I have observed in my travels, that very cold Countries, and very hot Countries, have neither so many Beauties, nor so much Wit, at lest not so much as more temperate Countries have.
What is the reason of that?
I cannot conceive the reason, unless the extreme coldness of the Climate should congeal their Spirits, and stupefy their Brains, making the Spirits unactive to get, and the Brain too barren to breed and bear Wit.
So then you make the Spirits and the Brain the Parents to Wit.
Yes Madam.
And what reason give you for the scarcity of Beauties in very cold Climates?
Beauty, Madam, is as tender and fading in the growth, as a Flower, although it be fresh and sweet; and the more delicate it is, the more subject to be nipped with the hard Frost, and to be withered with raw colds.
Then hot Countries should produce good store.
No Madam, for extreme heat dries up Wit, as water in a Spring, and Sun-burns beauty.
But hot Brains are thought to produce the greatest VVits.
Yes, if they be equally tempered with moisture; for as heat in moisture are Generators of all Creatures, so of Wit; but if the moisture exceed the heat, the Brain, or Mind becomes stupid, if the heat exceeds the moisture, the Brain or Mind becomes mad.
What Nation hath the best Language?
There are but three commendable things in Language, those
are to be significant, copious, and smooth, and the English tongue hath the perfection of all, there being an oil, or butter made of the cream of all o∣there Languages. Thus, what with the Temperature of the Climate, and the soft, smooth, spreading Language, England produces rarer Beauties, and eloquenter Orators, and finer Poets, than any other Nation in the world; and the Nobility and Gentry live not only in greater grandeur, than in other Na∣tions, but naturally appear or look with a more splendid Great∣ness.
Tic true, they did so in former times, when the Crown kept up Ceremony, and Ceremony the Crown; but since that Ceremony is down, their grandeur is lost, and their splendour put out; and no light thereof re∣mains: But they are covered with a dark rudeness, wherein the Clown ju∣stles the Lord, and the Lord gives the way to the Clown; the Man takes the wall of his Master, and the Master scrapes legs with Cap in hand to the Ser∣vant, and waits upon him, not out of a generous and noble Nature, but out of a base servile fear, and through fear hath given the Power away.
I am sorry to hear the Nobility is so degenerated.
I wonder your Lordship should be so troubled at your Fathers commands, which was to marry the Lady Ward, unless she had been ill-favoured and old.
O that's the misery! that she is so young, For I had rather my Father had commanded me to marry one that had been very old, than one that is so young; for if she had been very old, there might have been some hopes of her death; but this young Filly will grow upon me, not from me; besides, those that are young give me no delight, their Company is dull.
Why, she is not so very young, she is fifteen years of Age.
Give me a Lady to embrace about the years of twenty, rather than fifteen; then is her Beauty like a full-blown Rose in June, her Wit like fruit is ripe and sweet, and pleasant to the ear; when those of fifteen are like to green sharp Fruit, not ripened by the Sun of Time. Yet that's not all that troubles me; but I cannot endure to be bound in VVedlocks shackles, for I love variety, and hate to be tied to one.
Why, you may have the more variety by marrying.
No faith, it is a Bar; for if I should but kiss my wives Maid• which a thousand to one but I shall, my wife, if she doth not beat her Maid, making a hideous noise, with scoldings, yet she will pour, and cry, and feign her self sick, or else she would Cuckold me, and then I am paid for all.
Faith my Lord, it is a hundred to one but a man when he is mar∣yed
shall be Cuckolded, were he as wife as Solomon, as valiant as David, as fortunate as Caesar, as witty as Homer, or as handsome as Absalom; for Wo∣men are of the same Nature as men, for not one man amongst a thousand makes a good Husband, nor one woman amongst a thousand makes an honest Wife.
No saith, you might well have put another Cipher and made it ten thousand.
Well my Lord, since you must marry, pray let me counsel you: This Lady Ward being very young, you may have her bred to your own Humour.
How is that?
Why, accustom her to your ways before you marry her; let her see your several Courtships to several Mistresses, and keep wenches in your house; and when she is bred up to the acquaintance of your customs, it will be as natural to her.
What, to be a whore?
No, to know your humours, and to be contented there∣at.
Well, I will take your advice, although it is dange∣rous: And as the old saying is, the Medicine may prove worse than the disease.
Why, the worst come to the worst, it is but parting.
You say true; but yet a divorce will not clearly take off the disgrace of a Cuckold.
I have found out a service, a Farmer which hath the report of an honest labouring man, and his wife a good huswifely woman; they have only one daughter about your years, a pretty Maid truly she is, and seems a modest one; but how you will endure such rough and rude work, which perchance they will employ you in, I cannot tell, I doubt you will tire in it.
Do not fear, for what I want in strength, my industry shall supply.
But you must be fitted with clothes according, and proper to your service.
That you must help me to.
That I will.
Sweet Lady Contemplation, although your thoughts be ex∣cellent, yet there are fine curiosities and sweet pleasures to be enjoyed in the use of the world.
Perchance so, but would not you think that man a Fool that hath a great estate, a large convenient house, well situated, in sweet and healthful Air, pleasant and delightful, having all about for the eyes to view Landscapes, and Prospects; beside, all the inside richly furnished, and the Master plentifully served, and much company to pass his time with, as a re∣sort of men of all Nations, of all Ages, of all qualities or degrees, and pro∣fessions, of all humours, of all breedings, of all shapes, of all complexions: Likewise a recourse for all Wits, for all Scholars, for all Arts, for all Sci∣ences; Also Lovers of all sorts Servants of all use, and employments; Thus living luxuriously with all rarities and varieties, and yet shall go a begging, debasing himself with humble crouching, enslaving himself to Obligations, living upon cold Charity, and is denied often times unkindly, or kicked out scornfully, when he may be honoured at home, and served in state, would not you think that this man had an inbred baseness, that had rather serve un∣worthily, than command honourably; that had rather be enslaved, than free? Besides, that mind is a fool that cannot entertain it self with it's own thoughts; a wandering Vagabond, that is never, of seldom at home in Contemplation; A Prodigal to cast out his thoughts vainly in idle words, base to enslave it self to the Body, which is full of corruption, when it can create bodiless Creatures like it self in Corporalities; with which self Creatures, it may nobly, honestly, freely, and delightfully entertain it self. With which, the mind may not only delight it self, but improve it self; for the thoughts, which are the actions of the mind, make the soul more healthful and strong by ex∣ercises; for the mind is the souls body, and the thoughts are the actions thereof.
After what manner will you form this Body?
Thus, Understanding is the Brain, Reason the Liver, Love is the heart, Hate the Spleen, Knowledge the Stomach, Judgement the Sinews, Open∣nions the Bones, Will the Veins, Imaginations the Blood, Fancy the Spirits, the Thoughts are the Life, and Motion, or the Motions of the Life, the out∣ward Form is the Mind it self, which sometimes is like a Beast, sometimes like a Man, and sometimes like a God.
And you my fair Goddess.
My Lord, you are too covetous to take a wife merely for her riches.
Believe me Madam, I do esteem of such Riches as Money, as I do of Marriage, and in my nature I do hate them both; for a man is en∣slaved by either: wherefore I would shun them if I could, and turn them out of doors, but that some sorts of necessity and convenience enforce me to en∣tertain them; the one for Posterity sake, the other for subsistence of present life, besides convenient pleasures.
The Lady Ward, who is to be your wife, seems of a very dull disposition.
She is so, but I like her the better for that, for I would have a deadly dull Wife, and a lively Mistress, such a sprightly Lady as you are.
In truth my Lord, I am of a melancholy Nature.
Certainly Madam, you only know the Name, not the Nature, for your Nature is always fresh, and sweet, and pleasant, as the Spring.
O no, my mind is like to Winter, and my thoughts are numb and cold.
If your thoughts were so cold, your words would be as if they were frozen between your lips, all your discourse would melt by drops, not flow so smoothly and swiftly into men's ears, as they at all times do.
Tic true, I am merry when I am in your company, but in your absence I am as dull as a cloudy day, and as melancholy as dark night.
I cannot believe so well of my self, as that my company can be the light of your mirth, but I know that your company is the Sun of my life, nor could I live without it.
This is a barren Country, for in all this progress I have not seen a pretty Country wench.
Nor I.
Nor I.
If an person can tell, it is Tom Purveyor.
Now Tom Purveyor, are there no pretty wenches in this part of the Coun∣trey?
Yes that there are, an it please your Lordship, and not far off, two as pretty wenches as are in the Kingdom, and no dispraise to the rest.
Where? where?
Hard by here, at a Farmers House, the one is his Daught∣er, the other is his Servant-Maid.
Prithee Tom show us the house.
Not all at once; but one after another.
Nay faith Tom, let us all see them at once; but we will Court them apart.
Content.
What is the reason that Mercury is feigned to be the patron of Thieves?
That is to be the patron of Scholars, for Scholars are the greatest Thieves, stealing from the Authors they read, to their own use.
And why are Scholars counted the greatest Thieves?
Because that they steal the Spirits, or life of renown, out of the treasury of Fame; when all other sorts of Thieves steal but the goods of Fortune, which is nothing but a Corporal dross.
And why is he feigned the talkative God?
Because Scholars talk more than other men, and most com∣monly so much, as they will let none speak but themselves; and when there is a Company of Scholars together, they will be so fierce in disputes, as they will be ready to go to cuffs for the Prerogative of their opinion.
The Prerogative of the tongue you mean; but why are Scholars apt to talk most?
Because they overcharge their heads with several Authors, as Epicures do their Stomachs with variety of meats, and being overcharged, they are forced to vent it forth through the mouth, as the other through the gut; for the tongue, as a Feather, tickles the throat of Vainglory, vomiting out the slime of Learning, into the ears of the hearers; but some heads, as Stomachs which are naturally weak, are so grip'd, by reason it doth not dis∣gest well, as they vent nothing but windy Phrases; and other brains which are hot and moist, by reason of a facile memory, digest so fast, as they do nothing but purge loose Sentences; and other brains that are too dry and Insipid, are so costive, as their restringency strains out nothing but strong lines.
What is that, Non-sense?
Indeed they are hard words without sense.
What makes a good Poet?
A quick Fancy.
What makes a good Orator?
A ready Tongue.
What makes a good Physician?
Much Practice.
What makes a good Divine?
A Holy Life.
What makes a good States-Man?
Long experience, great observance, prudent industry, in∣genuous wit, and distinguishing judgment.
What makes a good Soldier?
Change of Fortune, Courage, Prudence, and Patience.
What makes a good Courtier?
Diligence, Flattery, and time-serving.
What makes a good Prince, or Governor?
Justice, Clemency, Generosity, Courage, and Prudence mixed together.
What makes a good Woman?
A Poet.
Why a Poet?
By reason the Poetical wits convert their natural defects into sweet graces, their follies to pure innocencies, and their Vices into He∣roick Virtues.
By these descriptions, you make as if women were more obliged to Poets than to Nature.
They are so; for where Nature, or Education, makes one good, or beautiful Woman, Poets make ten; besides, Poets have not only made greater numbers of beautiful women, but perfecter beauties than ever Nature made.
Then let me tell you, that women make Poets; for women kindle the masculine brains with the fire of Love, from whence arises a Poetical flame; and their Beauty is the fuel that feeds it.
I confess, were there no women, there would be no Poets; for the Muses are of that Sex.
Truly Husband our Maid Poor Virtue is a very in∣industrious Servant as ever I had in my life.
Yes wife, but you were angry with me at first because I per∣swaded you to take her.
Why, she seemed to be so fine a feat, as I thought she would never have settled to her work.
Truly Wife, she does forecast her business so prudently, and doth every thing so orderly, and behaves her self so handsomely, car∣rios her self so modestly, as she may be a Pattern to our Daughter.
I am a better Pattern my self.
Fair Maid, may I be your Shepherd to attend you.
I am but a single Sheep that needs no great attendance, and a harmless one, that strays not forth the ground I am put to feed.
Mistake me not fair Maid, I desire to be your Shepherd, and you my fair Shepherdess, attending loving thoughts, that feed on kisses sweet, folded in amorous arms.
My mind never harbors wanton thoughts, nor sends immodest glances forth, nor will enfold unlawful love, for chastity sticks as fast unto my Soul, as light unto the Sun, or heat unto the fire, or motion unto life, or ab∣sense unto death, or time unto eternity, and I glory more in being chaste, than Helen of her beauty, or Athens of their learning and eloquence, or the Lace∣demonions of their Laws, or the Persians of their Riches, or Greece of their Fa∣bless, or the Romans of their Conquests; and Chastity is more delightful to my mind, than Fancy is to Poets, or Music to the Ears, or Beauty to the Eyes, and I am as constant to Chastity, as truth to Unity, and Death to life; for I am as free, and pure from all unchastity as Angels are of sin.
I wonder not so much at Fortunes gifts, as Natures curiosities, not so much at Riches, Tittle and power, as Beauty, Wit, and Virtue, joined
in one; besides, she doth amaze me by expressing so much learning, as if she had been taught in some famous Schools, and had read many histories, and yet a Cottager, and a young Cottager, tic strange.
My Lord, doth my Counsel take good effect?
Yes faith, for she seems to take it very patiently, or else she is so dull a Creature as she is not sensible of any injury that's done her.
How doth she look when you address, and salute your Mi∣stress?
She seems to regard us not; but is as if she were in a deep contemplation of another world.
I think she is one of the fewest words, for I never heard her speak.
Faith so few, as I am in good hope she is tongue-tied, or will grow dumb.
That would be such a happiness, as all married men would en∣vi you for.
They will have cause, for there is nothing so tedious as talking women, they speak so constraintly, and utter their Nonsense with such formality, and ask impertinent questions so gravely, or else their dis∣course is snip snap, or so loud and shrill, as deafs a mans ears, so as a man would never keep them Company, if it were not for other reasons.
Your Lordship speaks as if you were a woman-hater.
O Pardon me, for there is no man loves the Sex better than I; yet I had rather discourse with their beauty than their wits; besides, I only speak of generalities, not particularities.
Lady, pray make me partaker of some of your conceptions.
My conceptions are like the tongue of an extemporary Orator, that after he hath spoke, if he were to speak upon the same subject he could hardly do it, if it were not impossible just to speak as he did, as to express the same subjects in the same expressions, and way of his natural Rhetoric; for the sense may be the same, but the expressions, &amp; way of Rhetoric will hard∣lie be the same; but it is likely will be very different, and so differing, as not to be like the same, but the same premeditated Rhetoric, will many times
serve to many several designs, or preaching, pleading, or speaking, the Theme or cause being altered; This is the difference betwixt extemporary Orato∣rye, and premeditated Oratory, the one may be spoke, as many times as an O∣rotor will, and make the same Oratory serve to many several Subjects; the o∣there being not fixed, but voluntary, vanishes out of the remembrance, the same many times do my conceptions.
But I hope all are not vanished, some remain; wherefore pray express or present any one of your conceptions after what manner of way you please.
Why then I will tell you, I had a conception of a Monster, as a Creature that had a rational soul, yet was a Fool: It had had a beautiful and perfect shape, yet was deformed and ill-favoured; It had clear distinguish∣ing senses, and yet was senseless; It was produced from the Gods, but had the nature of a Devil; It had an eternal life, yet dyed as a Beast, It had a body, and no body.
What Monster call you this?
I call him Man.
This is a Man of your own conception.
A man of Natures creating is as monstrous for though man hath a rational soul, yet most men are fools, making no use of their reason; and though Man hath a beautiful and perfect shape, yet for the most part, they make themselves deformed and ill-favoured with antic postures, violent passions, or brutish vices; and man hath clear distinguishing Senses, yet in his sleep, or with sumes, or drink, he is senseless: Man was produced immediately from the Gods, yet man being wicked, and prone to evil, hath by evil wick∣oddness the nature of a Devil; Man it is said, shall live for ever, as having an eternal life, yet betwixt this life and the other, he dyes like a Beast, and turns to dust as other Creatures do; but the only difference between the man Na∣ture creates, and the man my Conceptions create is, that Natures man hath a real substance as a real body; whereas my conceptive man is only an Idea, which is an incorporal man, so as the body of my concepted man, is as the soul of Natures created man, an incorporality.
Well, I have lost my first Course in Love, and now like an angry bloody Gray-hound, I will down with the first I meet, were she as innocent as a Dove, or as wise as a Serpent, down she goes.
But soft, here's Loves game, and Isle fly at her. Fair One, for so you are.
Truly Sir I am but a Blouse.
Think better of your self, and believe me.
My Father hath told me, I must not believe a Gentleman in such matters.
Why sweetest? I am a Lord.
A Lord; Lord bless your Worship then, but my Father gave me warning of a Lord, he said they might nay, say and swear too, and do any thing, for they were Peers of the Realm, there was no meddling with them he said, without a Rebellion, bless me from a Lord, for it is a naughty thing, as they say, I know not.
Do you value me so little, when I can make you an Apocryphal Lady?
The Apocrypha forsooth is out of my Book, I have been bred purer than to meddle with the Apocrypha, the Gods bless us from it, and from all such ill things.
Well, in short, will you love me?
I am so ashamed to love a Lord forsooth that I know not how to behave my self.
I will teach you.
If your Honour will take the pains to teach a poor ignorant Country Maid, I will do the best I can to learn forsooth; but will it not be too much pains for your Honour, do you think?
No no, it will be both for my Honour, and my pleasure, and for the pleasure of my Honour.
Bless us, how the Lords doe. It backward and forward at their pleasure, the finest that ever was; but what would your Honour have of me?
By this kiss Isle tell you.
O fie, fie, good your Honour, do not scandalise your lips to kiss mine, and make me so proud as never to kiss our Shepherd again.
No fie.
I will and must kiss you.
Nay, good your Honour, good your Honour.
What are you the better now? But I see there is no denying a Lord, for∣sooth it is not civil, and they are so peremptory too, the Gods bless them, and make them their Servants.
This kiss hath so inflamed me, therefore for Loves sake, meet me in the Evening, in the Broom close here.
I know the Close forsooth, I have been there before now.
Well, and when we meet I will discover more than yet I have done.
So you had need forsooth, for nothing is discovered yet, either on your side, or mine, but I will keep my promise.
There spoke my better Angel; so adieu.
An Angel, I will not break my word for two angels, and I hope there will be no dew neither, God shield you forsooth.
Fair Maid, stay and look upon my person.
Why, so I do.
And how do you like it?
As I like a curious built house, wherein lives a vain and self-con∣ceited owner.
And are not you in love with it?
No truly, no more than with a pencilled Picture.
Why, I am not painted.
You are by Nature, though not by Art.
And do you despise the best and curiousest Works of Na∣ture?
No, I admire them.
If you admire them, you will admire me, and if you admire me, you will yield to my desires.
There may be admiration without love, but to yield to your de∣sires, were to abuse Natures Works.
No, It were to enjoy them.
Nature hath made Reason in man, as well as Sense, and we ought not to abuse the one, to please the other; otherwise man would be like Beasts, following their sensualities, which Nature never made man to be; for she created Virtues in the Soul, to govern the Senses and Appetites of the Body, as Prudence, Justice, Temperance, and Conscience.
Conscience? What is that, natural fear?
No, it is the tenderest part of the Soul, bathed in a holy dew, from whence repentant tears do flow.
I find no such tender Constitution, nor moist Complexion in my Soul.
That is, by reason the Fire of unlawful Love hath drunk all up, &amp; seared the Conscience dry.
You may call it what Fire you will, but I am certain it is your Beauty that kindles it, and your Wit that makes it flame, burning with hot desires.
Pray Heaven my Virtue may quench it out again.
I am sure Nature requires a self-satisfaction, as well as a self-preservation, and cannot, nor will not be quiet without it, esteeming it beyond life.
I wonder my Lord Courtship, he being counted a wise man; should make me his Baud, if he intends to make me his Wife, and by my troth Nurse, I am too young for that grave Office.
How ignorantly you speak Child? it is a sign you have been bred obscurely, and know little of the world; or rather it proves your Mother dyed before you could speak, or go, otherwise you would be better experien∣ced in these businesses.
My Mother, Nurse, Heaven rest her soul, she would never have made me a Baud.
No, why then she would not do as most Mothers do now a days; for in this age Mothers bring up their daughters to carry Letters, and to receive messages, or at lest to watch at the door left their Fathers should come unawares, and when they come to make some excuse, and then the Mother laughs, and says her daughter is a notable witty Girl.
What, for telling a lye?
Yes, when it is told so, as to appear like a truth.
But it is a double fault, as to deceive the Father, and be a Baud to the Mother.
Why, the Mother will execute the same Office for the daugh∣la when she is married, and her self grown into years; for from the age of seven or eight years old, to the time they are married, the Daughter is a Baud to the Mother; and from the time of their marriage, to the time of their Mothers death, the Mother is a Baud to the Daughter; but if the Mother be indifferently young, and hath a young tooth in her head, as the old saying is, they Baud for each other.
But why doth not the Mother Baud for her Daughter, before she is married.
O there is reason for that, for that may spoil her fortune, by hindering her marriage: for marriage is a Veil to cover the wanton face of adultery, the like Veil is Baud-mothers, and Baud-daughters; for who would suspect any lewdness, when the Mother and the Daughter is toge∣there?
And are not Sons Pimps for their Fathers, as Daughters are for their Mothers?
No saith, Boys have facility, or ingenuity as Girls have; besides, they are kept most commonly so strictly to their Books, when Girls have nothing else to do; but when they have cast away their Books, and come to be married men, then they may chance to Pimp for their Wives.
O fie Nurse, surely a man will never play the Pimp to Cuckold himself.
O yes, if they be poor, or covetous, or ambitious; and then if they have a handsome woman to their wife, they will set her as a bait to catch their designs in the trap of Adultery; or patient, quiet, simple, fearful
men will, if they have a Sprightly wise, they will play the Pimp, either for fear, or quiet; for such men to such wives, will do any thing to please them, although it be to Cuckold themselves.
But surely Nurse no Gentleman will do so.
I know not who you call Gentleman, but those that bear up high and look big, and vant loud, and walk proud, and carry the out-side of a Gentleman, will do so.
Certainly Nurse they are but Bastard Gentry, or else they are degenerated.
An insipid Branch may spring from a sound Root, ma∣ny a withered and rotten Plum may hang on a good Tree.
And do Wives play the Bawds for their Husbands, as the Hus∣bands play the Pimps for their Wives?
Most often; for they will make Gossiping meetings, on purpose for their Husbands to Court other women; for they know when their Hus∣bands minds are filled with amorous love, they will not muse upon their act∣once, nor examine their ways; besides, when as the Husband would take his liberty without disturbance, he will wink at the liberty his wife takes, and so will be procures for each other, and the Ladies acquaintance are Confi∣dents.
Confidants, what is that, Nurse?
Why it is thus, two Ladies make friendship, or at least call Friends, and if any man desires to be a Courtly Servant to one of them, he addresses himself to the other, and expresses what Passions and Affections he hath for her friend, and so makes his complaints and affections known to her; whereupon she recommends his addresses and service to her Friend; thus doing a friendly Office by carrying and declaring his professions, and re∣turning her Friends civil answers, appointing places for each others love-meetings, the other will do as much for her.
Why this is a Baud.
O peace Child, for if any body heard you say so, they would laugh at you for a Fool, but it is a sign you never was a Courtier, for I knew a young Lady that went to Court to be a Maid of Honour; and there were two young Ladies that were Confidants to each other, and a great Prince made love to one of them, but adddrest himself to the other, as being her Friend; this young Maid asked why he did so, it was answered, she was the Princes Mistress Confident; and just as you ask me, what said she, is a confi∣dent a Baud; whereupon the whole Court laughed at her, and for that only question condemned her to be a very Fool, nay, a mere Changeling.
Well Nurse, say what you will, Confident is but a Courtly name for a Baud.
Those wandering Stars that shine like brightest day, are fixed on me, the Center of your love.
O Heavens!
Happy to touch those Lilies in your cheeks mingled with Roses, loves perfumed bath.
They grow forsooth in our Garden.
You are the Garden of all sweets for love, your blush∣ing lips of the Vermilion die, and those twin cherries,give me leave to taste.
Truly Sir, I understand no Latin, but I will call our Vi∣car to you, and he shall expound.
No dearest Dear, my lovely Dear, my dearest Love, my loveliest Dear.
I never cost you any thing as yet, Sir.
Why, then no Lady of Arcade bred.
Truly Sir, this is as our Vicar saith, like Hebrew without points, to be read backwards; say any thing forward in Notthingham-shire; speak, that I may guess at, and I will answer your Worship, though truly, it is as fine as ever I understood not.
Why then sweet heart I love you, and would gladly enjoy you.
O sie, enjoy is a naughty word forsooth, if it please you.
It would please me, your thoughts of what you mince.
Thoughts are free forsooth, and I love whole joints with∣out mincing.
Why then in plain English, I would have your Maiden-head.
O dear, how will you get it, can you tell? Truly, true∣lie, I did not think such naughty words would come forth of so fine a Gentle∣mans mouth.
But tell me truly, do you think me fine?
You will make me blush now, and discover all; so fine clothes, the Taylor of Norton never made such, and so finely made, unbotton∣ed and untrust doth so become you; but I do hang down my head for shame; and those Linen Boot-hose (as if you did long to ride,) do so become you, and your short Coat to hang on your left arm; O sweet, O sweet, and then your Hat hid with so fine a Feather, our Peacocks tails are not like it; and then your hair so long, so finely curled, and powdered in sweets, a sweeter Gentleman I never saw. My love's beyond dissembling, so young, so fresh, so every thing, I warrant you; O Sir, you will ravish me, but yet you can∣not.
O how you have made me thankfulness all over for this
your bounty to me; wherefore my earthly Paradise, let us meet in the next Close, there under some sweet Hedge to taste Loves aromatic Banquet at your Table.
O Sir, you blushes I consent; farewell; do not betray me then, you must not tell.
Farewell my sweetest, granting of my suit,
Shall still enslave me, and be ever mute.
Stay lovely Maid, and receive a Fortune.
I am Fortune proof Sir, she cannot tempt me.
But she may persuade you to reason.
That she seldom doth, for she is always in extremes, and
Extremes are out of Reason's Schools,
That makes all those that follow Fortune Fools.
What do you Rime, my pretty Maid?
Yes Rich Sir, to end my discourse.
I will make you Rich, if you will receive my gifts.
I love not gifts Sir, because they often prove bribes to cor∣rupt.
Why, what do you love then?
I love Truth, Fidelity, Justice, Chastity; and I love obedience to lawful Authority, which rather than I would willingly and knowingly infringe, I would suffer death.
Are you so wilful?
No, I am so constant.
But young Maid, you ought not to deny all gifts, for there are gifts of pure affection, Love-gifts of Charity, gifts of Humanity, and gifts of Generosity.
They are due debts, and not gifts; For those you call gifts of pure Love, are payments to dear deserving friends; and those of Charity are payments to Heaven; and those of Humanity are payments to Nature, and those Generosity, are payments to Merit, but there are vain-glorious gifts, covetous gifts, gifts of fear, and gifts that serve as Bawds to corrupt foolish young Virgins.
Are you so wise to refuse them?
I am so virtuous as not to take them.
What still musing, O thou idle creature?
I am not idle, for I busy my self with my own fancies.
Fancies are like dust, soon raised, and suddenly blown away.
No, they are as fire-works that sparkling fly about; or ra∣there stars, set thick upon the brain, which gives a twinkling delight unto the mind.
Prithee delight thy friends with thy conversation, and spend not thy time with dull thoughts.
Pray give me leave to delight my self with my own thoughts, since I have no discourse to entertain a hearer.
Why, your thoughts speak in your mind, although your tongue keeps silence.
It is true; but they disturb not the mind with noise, for noise is the greatest enemy the mind hath: and as for my part, I think the most useless sense that Nature hath made, is hearing: the truth is, that hear∣ing and smelling might well have been spared, for those two senses bring no materials into the brain; for sound and scent are incorporal.
Then put out all the senses.
There is no reason for that, for the eyes bring in pictures which serve the mind for patterns to draw new fancies by, and to cut, or carve out figurative thoughts, and the last serves towards the nourishment of the by∣die, and touches the life.
But wisdom comes through the ear by instruction.
Wisdom comes through the eye by experience; for we shall doubt of what we only hear, but never doubt of what we see perfectly: But the ground of wisdom is Reason, and Reason is born with the soul, where∣fore the ear serves only for reproof, and reproof displeases the mind, and seldom doth the life any good; nay many times it makes it worse, for the mind being displeased, grows angry, and being angry, malicious, and being malicious, revengeful, and revenge is war, and war is destruction.
But if you were deaf, you would lose the sweet harmony of music.
Harmony becomes discord by often repetition, and at the best it doth but rock the thoughts asleep; whereas the mind takes more plea∣sure in the harmony of thoughts, and the music of fancy, than in any that the senses can bring into it.
Prithee let this harmonious music cease for a time, and let us go and visit the Lady Conversation.
It seems a strange humour to me, that all mankind in general should have an itching tongue to talk, and take more pleasure in the wag∣ging thereof, than a beggar in scratching where a louse hath bit.
Why, every part of the body was made for some use, and the tongue to express the sense of the mind.
Pardon me, tongues were made for taste, not for words, for words wa an art which man invented: you may as well say, the hands were made to shuffle cards, or to do juggling tricks, when they were made to de∣fend and assist the body; or you may as well say, the leg were made to cut capers, when they were made to carry the body, and to move, as to go from place to place; for, though the hands can shuffle cards, or juggle, and the legs can cut capers, yet they were not made by Nature for that use, nor to that purpose; but howsoever, for the most part, the sense and reason of the mind is lost in the number of words; for there are millions of words for a single figure of sense, and many times a cyphre of nonsense stands instead of a figure of sense: Besides, there are more spirits spent, and flesh wasted with speaking, than is got or kept with eating, as witness Preachers, Pleaders, Players, and the like, who most commonly die with Consumptions; and I believe, many of our effeminate Sex do hurt the lungs with over-exercising of their tongues, not only with licking and tasting of Sweet-meats, but with chatting and prating, twitling and twatling; for I cannot say speaking, or discoursing, which are significant words, placed in a methodical order, then march in a regular body upon the ground of Reason, where sometimes the colour of Fancy is flying.
Now the Flag of your wit is flying, is the fittest time to encoun∣la the Lady Conversation; and I make no question but you will be Victory∣os, and then you shall be Crowned the Queen of Wit.
I had rather bury my self in a Monument of Thoughts, than sit in the Throne of Applause for Talking.
Sweet, why sit you so silently here?
My speech is buried in my thoughts.
This silent place begets melancholy thoughts.
And I love melancholy so well, as I would have all as silent without me, as my thoughts are within me; and I am so well pleased with thoughts, as noise begets a grief, when it disturbs them.
But most commonly Shepherds and Shepherdesses sit and sing to pass away the time.
Misfortunes have untuned my voice, and broke the strings of mirth.
Misfortunes? what misfortunes art thou capable of? Thou hast all thou were born to.
I was born to die, and it is misfortune enough I live, since my life can do no good: I am but useless here.
You were born to help increase the world.
The world needs no increase, there are too many creatures al∣ready, especially mankind; for there are more than can live quietly in the world; for I perceive, the more populous, the more vicious.
It is strange you should be so young, so fair, so witty as you are, and yet so melancholy; thy poverty cannot make it, for thou never knew the pleasure of riches.
Melancholy is the only hopes I do rely upon, that though I am poor, yet that may make me wise; for fools are most commonly mer∣riest, because they understand not the follies that dwell therein, nor have e∣nough considerations of the unhappiness of man, who hath endless desires, unprofitable travels, hard labours, restless hours, short pleasures, tedious pains, little delights, blasted joys, uncertain lives, and decreed deaths; and what is mirth good for? it cannot save a dying friend, nor help a ruined Kingdom, nor bring in plenty to a famished Land; nor quench out ma∣lignant Plagues; nor is it a ward to keep misfortunes off, though it may tri∣umph on them.
But you a young Maid, should do as young Maids do, seek out the company of young Men.
Young Maids may save themselves that labour, for Men will seek out them, or else you would not be sitting here with me.
And are you not pleased with my company?
What pleasure can there be in fears?
Are you afraid of me?
Yes truly; for the ill example of men, corrupts the good principles in women: But I fear not the perverting of my Virtue, but men's incivilities.
They must be very rudely bred, that give you not respect, you being so very modest.
It is not enough to be chastely modest and honest, but as a ser∣vant to my Mr. and Mrs. I must be dutiful, and careful to their commands, and on their employments they have put to me: wherefore I must leave you Sir, and go fold my sheep.
I will help you.
Sweet-heart, I have no Sonnets,  Songs, or stronger Lines, with softer Poesy to melt your Soul, nor Rhetoric to charm your Ears, or Logic for to force, or ravish you, nor lopped in richer clothes embalmed in Sweets, nor Courtly Language; but am an Ancient Squire, by name Sir Golden Riches, which hath force in all things, and then in Love; for Cupped being blind, he is for feeling, and look here my We•ch, this purse is stuffed with Gold, a hundred pounds.
Let me see, pour it on the ground.
I will obey thee: Look here my Girl.
O dear, how it doth shine for∣sooth! it almost blinds mine eyes; take it away, yet pray let it stay: truly I know not what to do with it.
No? why it will buy you rich Gowns, aped in the Silk-worms toils, with stockings of the softer silk, to draw on your finer legs, with rich lace shoes, with roses that seem sweet, and garters laced with spangles like twinkling Stars, embalm your hair with Gessimond Pomaetums, and rain Odoriferous Powders of proud Rome.
O Heaven! what a Wench shall I be, could I get them! But shall we have fine things of the Peddler too?
Buy all their packs, and send them empty home.
O mighty! I shall put down all the Wenches at the May-pole; then what will the Bag-piper say, do you think? Pray tell me, for he is a jeering knave.
Despise the Rural company, and that windy bag, change it for Balls with greatest Lords to dance, and bring the Jerkin Fiddles out of frame.
Then I shall have a Mail-Pillion, and ride behind our Thomas to the dancing.
No, you shall ride in rich gilt Coaches, Pages and Lackeys in rich Liveries, with Gentlemen well clothed, to wait upon you.
And be a Lady; then I will be proud, and will not know Thomas any more, nor any Maid that was acquainted with me.
You must forget all those of your Fathers house too; for I'll get a Pedigree shall fit you, and bring you Lineally descended from Great Charlemain.
No, I will have it from Charls wain my Fathers Carter; but I would so fain be a Lady, and it might be: I will be stately, laugh with∣out a cause, and then I am witty, and jeer sometimes, and speak nonsense aloud. But this Gold will not serve for all these fine things.
Why then we will have hundreds and thousands of pounds, until you be pleased, so I may but enjoy you in my Arms.
No Maid alive can hold our these Assaults, Gold is the Peter that breaks the Virgins gates, a Soldier told me so. Well then, my Lord Title, farewell, for you are an empty name; and Sir Effeminate Lovely, go you to your Taylor, make more fine clothes in vain.
I'll stick to Riches, do then what you will,
The nearest way to pleasure buy it still.
Why should Lord Courtship dislike me? Time hath not ploughed wrinkles in my face, nor dug hollows in my cheeks, nor hath he set mine eyes deep in my head, nor shrunk my sinews up, nor sucked my veins dry, nor fed upon my flesh, making my body insipid and bate; nei∣there hath he quenched out my wit, nor decayed my memory, nor ruined my understanding; but perchance Lord Courtship likes nothing but what is in perfection; and I am like a house which Time hath not fully finished, nor Education thoroughly furnished.
Sweet-heart, refuse not Riches, it will buy thee friends, pacify thy enemies; it will guard thee from those dangers that throng upon the life of every creature.
Heavenly Providence is the Marshal which makes way for the life to pass through the crowd of dangers, and my Virtue will gain me honest friends, which will never forsake me, and my humble submission will pacify my enemies, were they never so cruel.
But Riches will give thee delight, and place thee in the midst of pleasures.
No, it is a peaceable habitation, a quiet and sound sleep, and a healthful body, that gives delight and pleasure, and it is not riches; but riches many times destroy the life of the body, or the reason in the soul, or, at least, bring infirmities thereto through luxury; for luxury slackens the Nerves, quenches the Spirits, and drowns the Brain, and slackened Nerves make weak Bodies, quenched Spirits, timorous Minds, a drowned Brain, a watery Understanding, which causes Sloth, Effeminacy, and Simon∣plicity.
How come you to know so much of the world, and yet know so few passages in it, living obscurely in a Farmers house?
The Astronomers can measure the distance of the Planets, and take the compass of the Globe, yet never travel to them; nor have they Ambassadors from them, nor Liegers to lie therein to give Intelligence.
How come you to be so learnedly judicious, being so young, poor, and meanly born and bred?
Why, Fire, Air, Water, and Earth, Animals, Vegetables, and Minerals, are Volumes large enough to express Nature, and make a Scholar learn to know the course of her works, and to understand many of∣fects
produced therefrom. And as for Judgment and Wit, they are brother and sister; and although they do not always, and at all times agree, yet are they always the children of the Brain, being begot by Nature. Thus what Wit or Knowledge I have, may come immediately from Nature, not from my Birth or Breeding; but howsoever, I am not what I seem.
What makes you look so sad?
Why Monsieur Amorous's visit hath been the cause of the death of one of the finest Gentlemen of this Age.
How, pray?
Why thus; my Imagination (for Imagination can Create both Masculine and Feminine Lovers) had Created a Gentleman that was handsomer and more beautiful than Lender, Atones, or Narcissus; vali∣anter than Tamberlain, Scanderbeg, Hannibal, Caesar, or Alexander; sweeter-natur'd than Titus, the delight of mankind; better-spoken, and more e∣loquent than Tully, or Demosthenes; wittier than Ovid, and a better Poet than Homer. This man to fall desperately in love with me, as loving my Virtues, honouring my Merits, admiring my Beauty, wondering at my Wit, doting on my Person, adoring me as an Angel, worshipping me as a God∣dess; I was his Life, his Soul, his Heaven. This Lover courted my affe∣ction: with all the industry of Life, gifts of Fortune, and actions of Ho∣nor; sued for my favour, as if he had sued to Heaven for mercy; but I, as many cruel goddesses do, would neither receive his obligations, nor regard his vows, nor pity his tears, nor hearken to his complaints, but rejected his Suit, and gave him an absolute denial; whereupon he was resolved to dye, as believing no torments could be compared to those of my disdain; and since I would not love him living, he hoped by dying, his death might move my pity, and so beget a compassionate remembrance from me; where∣upon he got secretly near my chamber-door, and hung himself just where I must go out, which when I saw, I starred back in a great fright, but at last running forth to call for help to cut him down, in came Monsieur Amorous, which hinderance made me leave him hanging there, as being ashamed to own my cruelty; and he hath been talking, or rather prating here so long, as by this time my kind Love is dead.
O no, for Lovers will hang a long time before they dye; for their necks are tuff, and their hearts are large and hot.
Well, pray leave me alone, that I may cut him down, and give him Cordials to restore life.
Faith you must let him hang a little time longer; for I have un∣dertaken to make you a sociable Lady this day; wherefore you must go a∣broad to a friends house with me.
Who I? what do you think I will go abroad, and leave my Lover in a twisted string? his legs hanging daugling down, his face all black and swelled, and his eyes almost started out of his head; no, no, pray go alone by your self, and leave me to my Contemplation.
Well, if you will not go, I will never see you, nor be friends with you again.
Pray be not angry, for I will go, if you will have me, although I shall be but a dull companion; for I shall not speak one word; for where∣soever I am, my thoughts will use all their Industry to cut the string, and take him down, and rub and chafe him against a hot fire.
Come, come, you shall heat your self with dancing, and let your Lover hang.
That I cannot; for active bodies and active brains are never at once, the one disturbs the other.
Then it seems you had rather have an active brain, than an active body.
Yes; for when the brain doth work, the understanding is in∣riched, and knowledge is gained thereby: whereas the body doth oft-times waste the life with too much exercise.
Take heed you do not distemper your brain with too much exer∣cising your thoughts.
All distempers proceed from the body, and not from the mind; for the mind would be well, did not the humours and appetites of the body force it into a distemper.
Well, upon the condition you will go, you shall sit still, and your wit shall be the Music.
Prithee let me rest at home; for to day the strings of my wit are broken, and my tongue, like a fiddle, is out of tune: Besides, Contem∣plative persons are at all times dull speakers, although they are pleasant thinkers.

Sweet-heart, you are a most Heavenly Cry∣ture.
Beauty is created and placed oftner in the fan∣cy, than in the face.
It is said there is a Sympathy in likeness; if so, you and I should love each other, for we are both beautiful.
But it is a question whether our Souls be answerable to our Persons.
There is no question or doubt to be made, but that loving souls live in beautiful persons.
And do those loving souls dye, when their beauties are de∣cayed and withered?
The subject pleads it self, without the help of Rhetoric, for Love and Beauty lives and dies together.
It is Amorous Love that dies when Beauty is gone, not Ver∣tuous Love; for as Amorous Love is bred, born, lives, and dies with the ap∣petite: so Virtuous Love is Created, and shall live with the Soul for¦ever.
You may call it what love you please.
It is no love, but a disease.
Why did you leave the Lady Amorous company so un∣civilly, as to go out of the room, leaving her all alone?
I heard your Lordship was coming, then I thought it was fit for me to withdraw; for I have heard Lovers desire to be alone.
Do you desire to be alone with a man?
I am no such Lover, for I am too young as yet, but I know not what I shall or may be wrought or brought to, but time and good ex∣ample may instruct and lead me into the way of amorous love.
May it so?
Why not? for I am docible, and youth is apt to learn.
But before I marry you, I would have you learn to know how to be an obedient wife, as to be content, and not murmur at my actions, al∣so to please my humour, but not to imitate my practice.
If I might advise your Lordship, I would advise you to take such a Portion out of my Estate, as you shall think just or fit, and then quit me, and choose such a one as you shall like, for I shall never please you; for though I may be apt to learn what will please my self, yet I am dull and intractable to learn obedience to another will, nor can I flatter their delights.
I find you have learned, and now begin to practice how to talk; for now your sober silence seems as dead and buried in the rubbish of foolish words; But let me tell you, a talking wife will never please me; wherefore practise patience, and keep silence, if you would enjoy the hap∣pines of peace.
There can be no peace, when the mind is discontented.
Why do you follow me so much, as never to let me rest in peace and quiet alone? Is it that you think I have beauty? and is it that you are in love with? why, to cure your disease, I will deform it; or do you think I have wit to cure that Imagination? I will put my tongue to silence. I am sure it cannot be my Virtue that inflames you to an intem∣perance; for Virtue is an Antidote against it: But had you all the beauty in Nature squeezed into your form, and all the wit in Nature pressed into your brain, and all the prosperities of good fortune at your command, and all the power of Fate and Destiny at your disposal, you could not persuade me to yield to your unlawful desires; for know, I am honest without self-ends; my virtue, like to Time, still running forward, my chastity sexed as E∣ternity, without circumference lines; besides, it is built on the foundation of Morality, and roofed and cicl'd with the faith of Religion, and the materi∣else thereof are Honour, which no subtle Arguments can shake the one, nor no false Doctrine can corrupt or rot the other; neither is the building sub∣jest to the fire of unlawful love, nor the tempestuous storms of torments, nor the deluge of poverty, nor the earthquakes of fear, nor the ruins of death; for so long as my Soul hath a being, my Chastity will live. But were you as poor as I, even to move pity, or so lowly and meanly born, at might bring contempt and scorn from the proud, yet if your mind and soul were endued with noble qualities, and heroical virtues, I should sooner em∣brace your love, than to be Mistress of the whole World; for my affecti∣on to merit hath been ingrafted into the root of my Infancy, which hath grown up with my years, so that the longer I live, the more it in∣creases.
You cannot think I would marry you, although I would lie with you.
I cannot but think it more possible that you should marry me, than I to be dishonest.
Thou art a mean poor wench, and I nobly descended.
What though I am poor, yet I am honest, and poverty is no crime; nor have my Ancestors left marks of infamy to shame me to the world.
Thy Ancestors? what were they but poor peasants? where∣fore thou wilt dignify thy Race, by yielding to my love.
Heaven keep them from that dignity that must be gained by my dishonesty: no, my chastity shall raise a Monumental Tomb over their cold dead ashes.
What pity it is Nature should put so noble a soul into a mean∣born body.
Pray go visit the Lady Amorous, and if her husband be ab∣sent, deliver her this letter.
Excuse me my Lord.
Wherefore?
I am no Carrier of Love-letters.
But you shall carry this.
But I will not.
Will you not?
No, I will rather endure all the torments that can be in∣vented.
And you shall; for I will torture you if you do not; for I will have you drawn up high by the two thumbs, which is a pain will force you to submit.
Do so if you will; nay scrue me up into the middle-Region, there will I take a Thunderbolt, and strike you dead, and with such strength I'll fling it on you, as it shall press your soul down to the everlasting shades of death.
Sure you will be more merciful.
No more than Devils are to sinful souls; there will I be your Bawd, to procure you variety of torments; for I had rather be one in Pluto's black Court, caused by my own revenge, than to be a Bawd on earth, which is a humane Devil.
You are mad.
Might every word I speak prove like a mad dogs bite, not only to transform your shape, and turn your speech to barks and howl∣ings, but that your soul may be no other than the souls of beasts are.
You are transformed from a silent young Maid to a raging Fury.
May all the Furies that Hell inhabits, and those that live
on earth, torment your mind, as racks do torture bodies, and may the ve∣nom of all malice, spleen, and spite, be squeezed into your soul, and poi∣son all content, your thoughts flame like burning oil, and never quench, but be eternally a siery Animal; and may the fire feed only on your self, and as it burns, your torments may increase.
She is mad, very mad, and I have only been the cause.
Fairest, will not you speak?
My words have betrayed my heart, as discovering the se∣crets therein: wherefore I will banish them, and shut the doors of my lips against them.
What, for saying you love me. Sweet, why do you weep?
Tears are the best Cordials for a heart oppressed with grief.
I should hate my self, if I could think I were the cause. But pray forbear to weep.
Pray give my grief a liberty, my tears are no disturbance, they shower down without a rattling noise, and silent fall without a murmuring voice; but you disturb me: Wherefore for pity-sake leave me, and I will pray you may enjoy as much prosperity as good fortune can present you with, and as much health as Nature can give you, and as much tranquillity as Hey∣ven can infuse into a mortal creature.
Neither Fortune, Nature, nor Heaven can please me, or make me happy in this world without you.
O you torment me.
Surely Lady Contemplation your thoughts must needs be very excellent, that they take no delight but with themselves.
My thoughts, although they are not material, as being pro∣fitable, yet they are innocent, as being harmless.
Yet your thoughts do the world an injury, in burying your words in the grave of silence.
Let me inform you, that sometimes they creep out of
their graves as Ghosts do, and as Ghosts walk in solitary places, so I speak to my solitary self, which words offend no ears, because I speak to no ears but my own; and as they have no flatterers to applaud them, so they have no censurers to condemn them.
But you bury your life, whilst you live retired from company.
O no, for otherwise my life would be buried in company; for my life never enjoys it self, but when it is alone; and for the most part, all public societies are like a discord in Music, every one playing several contrary parts in their actions, speaking in several contrary notes, striking on several contrary subjects, which makes a confusion; and a confused noise is like a disordered multitude, only the one offends the ear, as the other of∣fends the eyes; and there can be no pleasure but in harmony, which harmo∣ny is Quantity, Quality, Symmetry, and Unity; and though quality, quantity, and symmetry are brought by the Senses, yet Unity is made in the mind. Thus Harmony lives in the mind; for without the mind, the senses could take no delight.
How do you Lady?
Why very well Doctor, how do you?
Why I was sent, as being believed you are mad.
Troth Doctor that's no wonder; for all the world is mad, more or less.
Do you find any distemper in your head?
My head will ache sometimes.
I mean a distemper in your mind.
My mind is troubled sometimes.
That is not well: let me feel your pulse.
Why Doctor, can you know the temper of my mind, by the feeling of my pulse?
There is a great Sympathy between the Mind and the Body.
But I doubt, Doctor, your learned skill is many times de∣ceived by the pulse; you will sooner find a mad distemper in the tongue or actions, than in the wrists.
In troth Lady, you speak reason, which those that are mad do not do.
O yes, Doctor, but they doe, as you cure Diseases, by chance.
O Love, dissembling love, that seem to be the best of passi∣once, and yet torments the soul!
What makes your Lordship so melancholy, as to shun all your friends, to walk alone?
I am in Love.
There are many remedies for love.
I would you could tell me one.
May I know the Lady you are in love with?
The Lady say you? she is a poor Lady•
Your Lordship is so rich, as you may marry without a pore∣tion,
O I could curse my fate, and rail at my destiny.
For what?
To make me fall in love with one I am ashamed to make her known.
Is she so mean, and yet so beautiful?
O she hath all the Beauties and Graces that can attract a soul to love; for surely Nature sate in Council to make her body, and the Gods sate in Council to compose her mind.
May not I see her?
Yes.
Where may I find her?
Upon the next Plain, under a bush that bends much like a bower, there she most commonly sits to watch her sheep; but I will go with you.
Your Lordship is not jealous?
All Lovers think their Beloved is never secure enough.
O my Child, I am told that on a sudden you turned mad!
Surely Nurse your fear, or what else it may be, you seem to me to be more mad than I can find in my self to be.
That shows you are mad.
If I am mad, I sucked the madness from your breast.
I do confess, Child, I have not had those mad vagaries since I gave suck, as I had before.
It is a sign you are grown old, Nurse.
I confess, Youth is oftner mad than Age; but dear Child tell me, art thou mad?
Prithee Nurse, lest thou should become mad, go sleep to settle thy thoughts, and quiet thy mind, for I remember a witty Poet, one Doctor Don, saith,
Sleep is pains easy salve, and doth fulfil
All Offices, unless i•'t• to kill.
O Heaven, what shall I do, what shall I do!
What is the matter Nurse, what is the matter you shriek out so?
O Doctor, my Child is mad, my Child is mad; for she re∣peats Verses.
That's an ill sign indeed.
Doctor, did you never repeat Latin Sentences when you have read Lectures, nor Latin Verses, when you did Dispute in Schools?
Yes, Sweet Lady, a hundred times.
Lord, Doctor, have you been mad a hundred times, and re∣covered so often!
Those were Latin Verses, those were Latin Verses Child.
Faith Lady you pose me.
Then Doctor go to School again, or at least return again to the University and study again, and then practise not to be posed.
Nurse, she is not well, she must be put to a diet.
But why, Doctor, should you think me mad? I have done no outrageous action; and if all those that speak extravagantly should be put to a diet, as being thought mad, many a fat waste would shrink in the doub∣let, and many a Poetical vein would be dried up, and the flame quenched out for want of radical oil to prolong it; Thus Wit would be starved, for want of vapour to feed it; The truth is, a spare diet may make room in a Scholars head for old dead Authors to lie in; for the emptier their heads are of wit, the fuller they may be filled with learning; for I do imagine, old dead Au∣thors lie in a Scholars head, as they say souls do, none knows where, for a million of souls to lie in as small a compass as the point of a needle.
Her brain is hotly distempered, and moves with an extraordi∣nary quick motion, as may be perceived by her strange fancy: wherefore Nurse you had best get her to bed; if you can, and I will prescribe some me∣dicine and rules for her.
Come sweet child, let me put thee to bed.
I will go to bed, if you would have me, but good Nurse believe me, I am not mad; it's true, the force of my passion hath made my Reason to err; and though my Reason hath gone astray, yet it is not lost: But consider well Nurse, and tell me what noble mind can suffer a base ser∣vitude without rebellious passions? But howsoever, since they are of this o∣pinion, I am content to cherish it, if you approve of it; for if I seem mad,
the next of my kindred will beg the keeping of me for the sake of my E∣state; and I had rather lose my Estate, and be thought mad, than lose my honour in base offices, and my free-born liberty to be enslaved to whores; and though I do not fear my honest youth can be corrupted by ill example, yet I will not have my youth a witness to wicked and base vice.
By no means, I do not approve of these strange ways; be∣sides, you are a Ward to a gallant man, and may be Marriage will alter his humour; for most commonly those back-holders that are the greatest Li∣bertines, make the best Husbands.
It is true, he is of a noble nature, valiant and generous, pru∣dent, and just, and temperate in all delights, and free from all other vices but Incontinence, civil and obliging to all the world, but to me, and I could love him better than life, could he be constant, and only love me as he ought to do a Wife; otherwise, Death were more pleasing to me.
You were born to do me a mischief.
Why how?
Why you have routed an Army.
Which way?
I did imagine my self Married, my Husband being a Ge∣neral of an Army, who had fought many Battles, and had won many Vi∣ctories, conquered many Nations, at last an unfortunate day of Battle be∣ing fought, my Husband being too active and venturous, making lanes of slain bodies as he went, and his horse riding thorough Rivers of blood, those Ri∣verse rising so high, as his horse was forced to swim; but the blood growing thick to a jelly, obstructed his way, which made his horse furious, which fury added to his strength, forced a passage over a hill, or heap of slain by∣dies; but the horses spirits being spent with fury and labour, fell strength∣less to the ground, with my Husband upon his back; and being in the midst of his Enemies Army, his Enemies seeing him fall, ran about him in great numbers, and so took him prisoner: whereupon his Soldiers soon missing him, thought he was killed; upon which belief, their courages grew cold, their limbs unactive, and their spirits so benumbed, as they all seemed like to a number of stone-statues; which unactive dullness gave their Enemies the Day without any after-blows. I being in the Camp, hearing of my Husbands misfortunes, ran with a distracted fear towards the Enemies Camp; I being espied by some of my Husbands scattered Troops, was stopped in the way, and so brought back to my Tent again; where, when I was there, some of my Husbands Officers of the Army told me, That though the Day was lost, yet there was a considerable Body left; which I no sooner heard, but my spirits took new life, and then excusing my fear, told those Comman∣ders it was not through fear that made me run out of my Tent; for I did
not fly from my Enemies, but to them, and that I sought death, and not life; and to express my courage, I told them, That if they would give me leave, I would take my Husbands Office, and lead the Army: They told me, that if the rest of the Commanders would agree to it, they were well contented: So when all the Commanders met together, I spake thus un∣to them.
Noble Friends, and valiant Soldiers, you may think it a vain ambition for me to desire to lead your Army, especially against so potent an Enemy, and being a woman, which female Sex are usually unexperienced in Mar••∣al Affairs, as also by nature fearful, which fears may ruin an Army, by go∣avenge wrong direction, causing a confusion through distraction; and truly an Army were not to be trusted unto a woman; management and ordering, if that Records had not given us Precedents, which is, that Woman have led Armies, have fought valiantly themselves, and have had good success, and not so much by fortunes favour, as by their own wise Conduct: And to show that Pallas is a friend unto her own Sex, is, that in all History, there are very few women than can be found, that have lost Battles in the field of Wars, but many that have won Battles; and in all public Affairs it is to be observed, the Gods do generally assist our Sex, whereby to show their own power, and to abate the haughty pride of men. But to induce you more; for men trust not so much unto the Gods, as to their own strength, is, that you are present in all Councels and Actions, to assist and direct me; besides, I am Wife unto your General, who was and is an expert Soldier, and a valiant man, although he now had ill fortune; but ill fortune neither lessens valour nor experience, but rather increases them. This gallant and wise man, my Husband and your General, his Discourses have been my Tutors, and his Example hath and shall be my Guide; and if you dare trust me, I dare venture; otherwise I shall stay in my Tent, and pray for your good success. After I had left off speaking, an old Commander which had served long in the Wars, and was much esteemed, answered me as thus.
Noble Lady, although your youth doth dissuade us, yet your beauty and wit doth encourage us; for what man, although he were possessed with fear itself, can run away when a fair Lady sights? for beauty triumphs in all hearts, and commands the whole world: wherefore that man that shall or will deny to follow your Command, is of a bastard-kind, although a lawful Issue. With that all the rest of the Commanders cried or called out, that none was so fit to Lead and Command them as I. Thus being chosen, I called a general Muster of my Soldiers, and then gave order that some of the broken Regiments should be mended and made up with other broken Regiments, also I made new Officers in the room of those that were slain or taken prisoners, and after, I surveyed my Artillery and Ammunition; which done, I drew my Army into a Body, and after I had given Orders and Directions for the Soldiers to march towards the Enemies Camp, which when the Enemy heard of a new Army coming towards them, they drew out the Body of their Army in Battle Array: But I shunned to fight so soon as appeared, by reason my Army was tyred with marching; wherefore I gave order to Entrench: Besides, I thought it might give my soldiers more courage, when accustomed to the fight and neighbourhood of the Enemies: But withal, I made some of them give intelligence to the En∣my that a woman led the Army, by which they might despise us, and so be∣come
more negligent, by which negligence we might have an advantage: In the mean time I sent to Treat of a Peace, and to have my Husband set at liberty; but the Enemy was so averse to a peace, as they returned me both jesting and scornful Answers: So when I saw no peace could be made, I drew out my Army into Battle Array; which when the Enemy perceived, they did the like; but it will be too tedious at this time to tell the Form and Figures I put my Army into, as also what Commanders led, or who omman∣ded the Horse, or who commanded the Foot that day; only let me tell you, I led the Van my self, and was Accoutred after this manner: I had a Mas∣culine Suit, and over that a cloth of silver Coat, made close to my waste, which reached to the ankles of my legs; and those Arms I wore being all gilt, were Back, Breast, Gorget, Pot and Gantlet, all being made light accor∣ding as my strength would bear: In my hand I carried my Sword; for be∣ing not accustomed, I could not wear a sword by my side, as men do, but whenever rested, I tied it to my Saddle-bow, and on my Head-piece I wore a great Plume of Feathers: As for my Horse, he was cole-black, on∣lie a white star on his fore-head, and three white feet; my Saddle was crime∣son Velvet, but so embroidered with silver and gold, as the ground could not be seen: But when I was mounted, I spoke as following unto the com∣mon soldiers.
Worthy Friends, and laborous, and valiant Soldiers, you may justly won∣der to see a Woman thus Accoutred like a man, and being one of the ten∣der female Sex to be armed as a soldier, and in a posture to fight a Bat∣tel: Also you may fear the success of my Command, by reason I am young, and unexperienced, as also unpractised in the Wars: But fear not, the gods are with me, and will assist me, and have promised to give you victory by my Conduct; for they will conduct me: But the Gods suffered the other Battle to be lost, because many Victories had made you proud, and conceit∣ed of your selves, and your own valours, trusting more to your own strength, than to their favours or powers, whereupon the Gods destroyed many of you; but since they have taken pity of you, drawn to it by your humility: whereupon the Gods have commanded me to Lead and Conduct you; and they have also commanded me to tell you, That if you trust in them, and fight courageously, that you shall have Victory, and rich Spoils; for I heard the common people, of which common soldiers were of, were apt to be su∣perstitious, and to believe in any new reports, as also to believe in Miracles, Prophecies, and the like, and withal, very covetous; all which, made me feign my self to be commanded immediately from the Gods, and to be sent as from the Gods to command them, and to declare such promises to them; for all the common soldiers sight for Spoils, not for Honour.
O but it is not good to dissemble.
Pardon me; for without policy (which is deceit) there can be neither government in peace or war: wherefore it is a virtue in a States-man, or a Commander, to be a dissembler, although it be a vice in a∣ny other man; but you have put me out as you always do, and therefore I will tell you no more.
Nay, pray make an end.
I will not; but I could have told you how I killed the Ge∣neral of the Enemy with my own hand, and how I released my Husband, and of such gallant Acts as you never heard the like of.
O pray tel me.
Which if I do, let me never contemplate more, which would be worse than death to me, by reason it is the only pleasure of my life.
O Love, though thou art bred within the Soul, yet by the Senses thou art begotten, or else by some Opinions; for Virtue is but the Tutor, or Guide, for to instruct or lead thee in a perfect way• bur though I lead Love right, yet may it meet Opposers.
How do you find my Ward?
Truly she is somewhat distempered; for her wit is ve∣rye quick.
That's it; for she being naturally of a dull disposition, and of a mild humour, and her brain slow of conceits, as also unpractised in speaking, should of a sudden fall into high raptures.
You say true, my Lord; and it is to be feared this distem∣per will increase.
Pray Doctor have a regard and care to her distemper; for I would not willingly have a Wife that is more mad than natural wo∣men are.
She is not here.
O yonder she comes.
She hath a garb not like a Farmers Maid, but rather one
that's nobly born, and her garments, though mean, sit nearly on her body.
Fair Shepherdess, it is a melancholy life you lead.
It is a course of life suits best to my condition.
You may change this condition if you please.
I had rather lie honoured in death, than by dishonour raised to glorious state of life.
But here you live like a creature not produced by mankind, amongst beasts, having no conversation by discourse.
Want of Speech makes not beasts beasts, but want of Reason, &amp; want of Reason makes a man a beast; and speech rather disturbs than been∣fits the life, when silence and pure thoughts make men like Angels, whereas speech sometimes expresses men like Devils, blaspheming Heaven and God, fomenting factions amongst their kind, betraying trust &amp; friendship, cozening innocence, slattering vice, reproaching virtue, and with distractions strives to pull down honour from its feat; where silence refines the thoughts, eel∣vates the fancy, quickens wit, strengthens judgment, allays anger, sweetens melancholy, and collects the Reason.
Thou art a wonder, and for this one Speech I doe adores thee.
I should be sorry so worthy a person, and so noble a Gentleman as you seem to be, should adore my Speech, when it might be chance that did produce it, and not wit or judgment.
Thy speech is like to Orpheus Harp, it charms all ears that hear it.
I wish my Speech were like a Loadstone, to draw the iron hearts of men to pity and compassion, to charity and devotion.
Pray stay and choose me for your Love, and let me go along with you.
An Amorous Lovers, as I believe your Lordship is, never walks in sober pace, nor hath a constant and assured mind; for Amorous Lovers run with might and main, as if desires were caught with haste.
I perceive Farmers breed pretty Maids, and honest, as well as Lambs and Doves, and witty and well-behav'd Maids, as well as Courts and Cities do. O that I were unmatied, that I might wed this Sweet, Fair Country-maid!
But stay, here comes another by my troth, a very pretty Lass, but yet her garments sit not so neat, nor becoming, nor is her behavi∣our so graceful as the other Maids was. Sweet Mistress!
Pray keep your jeers to your self, I am no Mistress.
You may be my Mistress, if you please, and I will be your servant.
What to do?
What you please.
I am seldom pleased, and an idle fellow will anger me more.
I will be very industrious, if you please to set me to work.
You idle slut, do you stand loitering here, when it is more than time the Cows were milked?
Go milk them your self with a murrain, since you are so light-finger'd.
I will milk your sides first.
I marry Sir, this is right as a Farmers daughter should be; but in my Conscience the other Maid that was here before her is a bastard, begot by some Gentleman.
Let me tell you, Sir Iohn Argument, Love delivers up the whole Soul to the thing beloved; and the truth is, none but one soul can love another.
But Justice, Madam, must be the rule of Love; wherefore those souls which Love must give the bodies leave to join.
O no; pure souls may converse without gross bodies.
Were it not for the Senses, Madam, souls could have no ac∣quaintance, and without an acquaintance, there can be no reciprocal affecti∣on; and will you make the Senses, which are the souls chief confidence, to be strangers or enemies?
I would have them converse, but not interrupt.
The bodies must have mutual friendship and correspondence with each other, or otherwise they may dissemble, or betray the souls; or abuse the trust, loose appetites or wandering senses or contrary humours; and what can interrupt Love more than the disagreement of bodies?
The Senses and Appetites of the Body, are but as subject to the Soul.
But it is impossible for Foreign Princes, as I will compare two loving souls unto, can live in peace and mutual amity, if their subjects disagree.
O Mistress Troublesome, you are welcome; for you shall end the dispute between Sir Iohn Argument and I.
If you cannot decide the Dispute your selves, I shall never do it. But what is the Dispute Madam?
Whether there can be a perfect friendship of Souls without a reciprocal and mutual conversation and conjunctions of Bodies?
Faith, Madam, I think it would be a very faint friendship betwixt the Souls, without the Bodies.
I perceive Sir Iohn Argument and you would never make Ply∣tonick Lovers.
Faith, Madam, I think Platonic is a word without sense.
You say right, Mistress Troublesome, it is an insensible love.
It is the Soul of Love.
What's that, Madam, a Ghost, or Spirit?
Indeed it hath no material body.
No, for it is an incorporal thing.
What is an incorporal thing, Sir Iohn?
Why, nothing.
Pray leave this discourse, or else you will talk nonsense.
That's usual in Conversation.
Setting aside this discourse at Mistress Troublesomes request, Pray tell me how the Lady Contemplation doth?
Faith Madam, by the course of her life one might think she were an incorporal thing.
Why?
Because she makes but little use of her Body, living always within her Mind.
Then her Body stands but as a Cipher amongst the Figures of her thoughts.
Just so, by my Troth.
Pray bring me acquainted with the Lady Contemplation.
If it be possible, I will; but the Lady Visitant can do it bet∣la than I.
I am resolved I will visit her.
What, is your passion over?
My passion will strive to maintain my honour, and you may take my life; but as long as I live, my passion will fight in the quarrel. But what man of honour will make a Bawd of her he intends to make his Wife? and what man of honour will be cruel to those that are weak, helpless, and shiftless? and what man of honour will be uncivil to the meanest of our Sex? It is more noble to flatter us, than to quarrel with us;
but that I have heard you are valiant, I should think you were a base cow∣art, and such a one that would quarrel in a Brothel-house, rather than fight in a Battle: But I perceive you are one that loves Pleasure more than Ho∣nor, and Life more than Fame; and I hate to be in that mans company, or to make a Husband, whose courage lies in Volupmousness, and his life in Infamy: I will sooner marry Death, than such a man.
Her words have shot through my soul, and have made a sen∣sible wound therein. How wisely she did speak! how beautiful appeared! Her mind is full of honour, and the actions of her life are built upon noble principles; so young, so wise, so fair, so chaste, and I to use her so basely as I have done! O how I hate my self for doing so unworthily!
The more ground is trodden on, the easier the path to walk in.
It seems so, that you visit me so often.
Why, thou art such sweet company, and behav'st thy self so prettily, as I cannot choose but visit thee.
I would, if I could, behave my self so to the world, as my indiscretion might not defame me.
Why do you think of a Fame?
Why not? since fame many times arises from poor Cottages, as well as from great Palaces; witness the Country labouring-man, that was taken from the plough, and made an Emperor, as being thought sit to rule, both for Justice and Wisdom, and he was more famous than those that were born of an Heroic Line, and were of Royal dignity; and David a shepherd, became a King. It is Merit that deserves a fame, not Birth; and sometimes Merit hath its desert, though but seldom.
Thy discourse would tempt any man.
Mistake not my discourse, it hath no such devilish design; for to tempt, is to pervert: It is true, my Nature takes delight to delight and please others, and not to cross or displease any, yet not to tempt, or to de∣lude with counterfeit demeanours, or fair insinuating words, smooth speech, or oiled tongue, to draw from Virtues side, but to persuade and plead in Virtues cause.
Thy very looks would gain a cause, before thy tongue could plead.
Alas! mans countenance is like the Sea, which ebbs and flows as passion moves the mind.
I am sure Love moves my mind, and makes it in a fiery heat.
If it be noble Love, it is like the Sun, which runs about to give both light and heat to all the world, that else would sit in darkness, and be both cold and sterile; so doth a noble mind run with industry to help those in distress, his bounty heats, his counsel and advice gives light.
I love you so much, Sweet-heart, that since you will not be my Mistress, you shall be my Wife.
Indeed I will not.
Will you refuse me?
Yes.
Wherefore?
Because I know, though you may use me well at first, after a time you'll be divorced.
I will never part from thee.
O yes but you will, for youth and beauty most commonly are inconstant; for vain ambition, and flattering praises, corrupt that mind that lives therein, and is pleased therewith.
Well, I will become a new man, and cast off all vanity, and study Moral Philosophy, to gain this Maid; for then perchance she will love me.
Complements are the worst sort of Conversation, for they are not sociable; besides, Truth holds no intelligence nor corre∣spondence with them.
Truth is no Complement as flattery, and I speak nothing but what truth hath dictated to my tongue.
Those praises you gave me were writ by speech, in so fine a style of Eloquence, with such flourishing Letters of words, as I cannot believe but that custom of self-conceited wit or passion, hath given the Scribe, which is the Tongue, a bribe to slatter me.
This is a wonder to see you, Lady Contemplation, abroad, I doubt it doth Prognosticate some change of Fortune, pray Jove it be good.
All the ill will fall on me, Madam.
Nay, faith Madam, she accounts company a worse for∣tune than the ruin of a Kingdom, and you cannot conceive with what dif∣ficulty I have got her abroad; for at first I did persuade her with all the
Rhetoric I had, and pleaded with as powerful arguments as I could find, any promised more than I was able to perform, and nothing of this could get her forth, until I told her I would bring your Ladyship to visit her, and that forced her out; for she said, she would rather trouble you, than you should trouble her.
Faith, Contemplation, thou art only sit to keep beasts com∣pany; for what difference is there betwixt beasts and men, but Conver∣sation.
Indeed beasts want that folly of idle Conversation, and the error of speaking, as much as the vanity of dressing, and the custom of dissembling; for they spend their time more prudently, quietly, easily, ho∣nestly, so more happily; and if it were for no other reason than speaking, I had rather be a beast, than of mankind.
O fie, O fie, you are a beastly Lady.
No, Madam, beasts have no false Titles of Honour, their honour lives in their natures, not in their names.
Who that may choose, or have their liberty, would spend their time in idle thoughts?
All that are wise, and would be happy; for should not we think that man were mad, that leaves a peaceful habitation, and thrusts him∣self in foreign broils? or should not we think a King were most unjust, that makes his peaceful and obedient subjects slaves to strange Princes? The Mind's a Common-wealth, and the Thoughts are the Citizens therein, and Reason rules as King, or ought to doe: But there is no reason we should vex our Thoughts with outward things, or make them slaves unto the world.
But thoughts would want employment, were it not for the world, and idleness were worse than slavish toils.
The thoughts, without the worlds materials, can Create millions of worlds, only with the help of Imagination.
Then your Mind and the World are mere strangers.
I say not so; for though the World draws not my Mind to wander up and down, yet my Mind draws the World to it, then pencils out each several part and piece, and hangs that Landscape in my Brain, on which my thoughts do view with Judgments eyes. Thus the world is in my Mind; although my Mind is not in the world.
Then you enchant the world?
I had rather enchant the world, than the world should in∣chant me.
If the Mind be a Common-wealth, as you said even now it was, Pray tell me of what degree the Passions are of?
They are the Nobles thereof, and Magistrates therein; each several Passion still governs in its turn and office.
And what are the Appetites?
The Appetites are none of the Mind's Citizens, but they are an unruly Rout that dwell in the Senses, which are the Suburbs of the Body: Indeed the Appetites are the Out-Lawries, and doe oft-times much hurt with their disorders, insomuch as they, many times, disturb the minds tranquillity, and peace. But, Madam, lest the appetite of talking should di∣sturb the Mind, I shall kiss your Ladyships hand, and leave you to those that are more delightful and pleasanter company than I am.
Lady Conversation, I perceive you and Sir Vain Complement are grown dull with the Lady Contemplations company.
Mercury defend me from her; for I would not keep her company for Ioves Mansion.
And Cupped defend me from her; for I would not be bound to Court her for the Favours Venus gives to Mars.
Lord what a dull piece of gravity she is!
She looks as if she conversed with none but Ghosts and Spirits, walking in Moon-shine, and solitary and dismal places.
Let us talk of her no more; for I am so far from keeping her acquaintance, as I hate to hear her named.
My Sweet, Fair Maid, I cannot hope thy Pardon, for my crimes are not only great, but many; for I have not only used you un∣kindly, uncivilly, ungentlemanly, which are vices and crimes that Canker∣fret the Fame of Honour, and bury all noble qualities; but I have used you barbarously, cruelly, and inhumanly, which are sins sufficient to annihi∣late all the Masculine Race; and surely, if there be that we call Justice in Nature, it will, unless thy virtue redeem them, and save them with thy pity: wherefore, for the sake of the generality, though not for my particular, par∣don me. Thus will you become a Deity to your whole Sex and ours.
I am sure your Lordship is a particular punishment to me, which Heaven send me quit of.
Lady, you smother your thoughts, and stifle your cons∣ption in the close Closet of Study.
No Sir, I only keep them warm, being tender and weak.
They will grow stronger in the Air of Conversation; but when continually kept close in the Chamber of Contemplation, they will be apt to fall into many several diseases, as melancholy Opinions, and extrava∣gent Fancies, which may over-heat the mind, and sire the thoughts: where∣fore Lady let me give you Counsel.
What Counsel would you give me? as a Lawyer, or Phy∣cian?
As a Physician.
For the Body, or the Mind?
For the Mind.
The Physicians for the Mind are Divine:
No, the best physicians for the Mind are Poets.
How will you prove that?
By Example and Skill; for when the Mind is raging mad; Poets, with gentle persuasions, in smooth numbers, and soft music, cure it; and when the Mind is despairing, Poets draw hopes into numbers, which beats out the doubtful Foe: And for Example.
David with his Poetical Inspirations, and Harpsical harmonious Music, allayed the ill Spirit, and raging passion of Saul; for Poets take from the sweet Spring of Nature, an Oil of Love, and from Heaven, the Balsam of Mercy, and pour them through golden numbers, and pipes of wit, into the festered wounds of despair, when oft-times Divines, in stead of suppling Oil, pour in corroding Vitriol, and in stead of healing Balsoms, pour in burning Sulphur, which are terrifying threats, and fearful menaces: where∣fore Lady, let me advise you as a Poetical Physician, to keep your mind cool, and your thoughts in equal temper; wherefore in order thereto, when the mind is wrapped in the mantle of Imagination, if it finds it self very hot therewith, let it lay that mantle by, and bathe it self in the fresh, clear, pure Rivers of Discourse.
By your favour, Sir, for the most part, the Mind becomes hotter with the motion of the tongue, than the mantle of Imagination; for when the tongue hath liberty, it runs wildly about, and draggs the mind af∣la it; and rather than I will have my minded dragged and hurried about by my unruly tongue, which will neither endure the bit of Reason, nor the bri∣dl of Discretion, but runs beyond all sense, I will tie up my tongue with the cords of silence, in the stable of the mouth, and pull down the Portcullis of the teeth before it, and shut the doors of my lips upon it. Thus shall it be treble locked, and kept with the Key of Judgment, and the Authority of Prudence.
Did you hear him say he had lain with me?
Yes, Madam.
O the wicked, base vain-glory of men, to belly the pure chastity of a woman! But surely he did not plainly express so much in clear words, as by nods, winks, shrugs, dark sentences, or broken discourses?
He said plainly, he had lain with you in an unlawful manner.
Fates assist me in revenge; for it is no dishonour to be re∣veng'd of a base person, that hath maliciously slandered me, or vainglory∣ously injured me.
Revenge is against the Laws of Honour, Madam.
It may be against the Tenets of some particular Reli∣gion,
or religious Opinions. But a noble revenge is the ground or foundati∣on of Heroic Honour.
But what do you call a Noble Revenge?
First, to be an open Enemy, as to declare the enmity; next, to declare their endeavour to prosecute to the utmost of their power, either their Enemies Estate, Liberty, and Life; whereas a base Revenger is to dissemble, in professing they have forgotten and forgiven their injury, and pardoned their Enemy, yet under-hand and disguisedly endeavour to do their Enemy a mischief. Not but an honourable Revenger may choose their time for executing their revenge; but they must declare they will be revenged be∣fore they execute their revenge, and let their Enemies stand upon their Guard.
But a revengeful woman is not good.
Why not, as well as a revengeful man? For why may not a woman revenge her scandalised honour as well as a man? Is there any reason why it should be a dishonour for a man to pass by a disgrace, and for a woman to revenge her disgrace? Is it not as great a blemish to the honour of a woman, to be said to be unchaste, as for a man to be said to be a Cow∣art? And shall a woman only sit and weep over her lost honour, whilst a man fights to regain his? And shall it be thought no dishonour for a man to pistol, or at least bastonade another man for an injury, or an affront re∣ceiv'd, and a fault for a woman to do, or cause to be done the like? Must women only sit down with foolish patience, and endure wrong, when men may execute revenge with fury? These were both injustice, and an unjust act of Education to our Sex; as also it would be an unjust sentence, not on∣lie from men, but from the Gods, since neither Gods nor men will suffer in∣jury, wrong, or dishonour, without revenge: But if Gods, Men, and Adieu∣cation should be so unjust to our Sex, yet there is no Reason in Nature we should be so unjust to our selves: But for my part, as I am constant to an honest friend, and can easily forgive an honourable Enemy, so I can never forgive a malicious Foe, nor forget a vain-glorious bragging fool, or false slandring knave, but will persecute them to the utmost of my power, and the weight of my revenge should be according to the pressure of my injury, or dishonour.
But let me tell you, Madam, those that brag are seldom be∣leaved, and there is none that believe these vain bragging Renters; for it's well known, that all Renters are idle deboyst persons, and do usually belie the most Honourable and Chaste Ladies, for which all worthy persons hate them, and account them so base, as they will shun their companies; no man of honour will come near them, unless it be to beat them. But if you appear to the world as concerned, you may raise those doubts which would never have been raised, had you took no notice thereof.
Indeed Disputes raise doubts; wherefore I will not bring it into a Dispute, but take your Counsel, and take no notice of it.
You will do wisely, Lady.
I wish my tongue as smooth as oil, to make my words as soft as Air, that they may spread about your heart, there intermixed with your affection.
Words cannot win my love, no more than wealth, nor is my heart subject to those infections.
I will build thee Palaces of burnished gold, where thou shalt be worshipped whilst thou livest, and when thou die, I will erect a Mo∣nument more famous than Mausolus's was.
My Virtue shall build me a Monument far richer, and more lasting; for the materials with which it shall be built, shall be tried Chasti∣tie, as pure Gold, and Innocence, as Marble white, and Constancy, as undis∣solving Diamonds, and Modesty, as Rubies red, Love shall the Altar be, and Piety, as Incense sweet, ascend to Heaven, Truth, as the Oil, shall feed the Lamp of Memory, whereby the flame of Fame shall never go out.
And is She gone? are Riches of no force? Then I will bu∣rye my self within the bowels of the Earth, so deep, that men shall never reach me, nor Light shall find me out.
My Lord, my Lady, the Lady Amorous, remembers her Service to you, and sent me to tell you her Husband is gone out of Town, and She desires to have the happiness of your company.
Pray present my Service in the humblest manner to your Lady, and pray her to excuse me; for though I cannot say I am sick, yet I am far from being well.
I shall, my Lord.
My Lord, there is an old man without desires to speak with you.
Direct him hither.
Old man, what have you to say to me?
I am come to desire your Lordship not to persecute a poor young Maid, one that is friendless, and your Lordship is powerful, and therefore dangerous.
What poor Maid do you mean?
A Maid called Poor Virtue.
Do you know her?
Yes.
Are you her Father?
No, I am her servant, and have been maintained by her Noble Family these threescore years, and upwards.
Ha, her Noble Family! what, or who is She?
She is a Lady, born from a Noble Stock, and hath been choisely bred, but ruined by misfortunes, which makes her poorly serve.
Alas he weeps! Who were her Parents?
The Lord Morality, and the Lady Piety.
Sure it cannot be: But why should I doubt? her Beauty, Wit, and sweet Demeanour, declares her Noble Pedigree: The Lord Morality was a Famous man, and was a great Commander, and wise in making Laws, and prudent for the Common Good: He was a Staff and Prop un∣to the Common-wealth, till Civil Wars did throw it down, where he fell under it. But honest friend, how shall I know this for a truth?
Did not your Lordship hear he had a Child?
Yes that I did, an only Daughter.
This is She I mention, and if Times mend, will have her Fa∣theirs Estate, as being her Fathers Heir; but to prove it, and her Birth, I will bring all those servants that lived with her, and with her Father, and all his Tenants, that will witness the truth.
When I consider, and bring her and her Actions to my mind, I cannot doubt the truth, and for the news, thou shalt be my Adopted Father, and my Bosome-friend; I'll be a staff for thy Old Age to lean upon, my shoulders shall give strength unto thy feeble limbs, and on my neck shalt lay thy restless head,
Heaven bless you, and I shall serve you as my Old Age will give me leave.
Thou Celestial Creature, do not believe that I am so pre∣sumptuous to ask thy love, I only beg thy pardon, that when my body lies in the silent grave, you give my restless soul a pass, and leave to walk a∣amongst sad Lovers in dark and gloomy shades; and though I cannot weep to show my penitence, yet I can bleed.
Here, take this Instrument of Death, for only by your hands I wish to die.
Give me as many Wounds as Pores in skin,
That I may bleed sufficient for my sin.
It seems strange to me, that you, a wise man, or at least ac∣counted so, should fall into such extremes, as one while to hate me to death, and now to profess to love me beyond life!
My Debaucheries blinded my Judgment, nor did I know thy worth, or my own error, until thy wise wit gave the light to my dark understanding, and you have drawn my bad life, and all my unworthy act∣once therein, so naturally in your discourse, as now I view them, I do hate my self as much as you have cause to hate me.
I only hate your Crimes, but for those excellent Qualities, and true Virtues that dwell in your Soul, I love and honour; and if you think me worthy to make me your Wife, and will love me according as my honest life will deserve your affections, I shall be proud of the Honour, and thank Fortune or Heaven for the Gift.
Sure you cannot love me, and the World would condemn you if you should, and all your Sex will hate you.
The World many times condemns even Justice her self, and women, for the most part, hate that they should love and honour.
But can you love me?
I can, and do love you.
How happy am I, to enjoy a world of Beauty, Wit, Virtue, and sweet Graces.
Honest Roger and Maudlin, I present you with a kind Good-morrow.
Present me? Bless your Lordship, I should present you with a couple of Capons.
It is a salutation when you salute; but how do you then?
Very well, I thank your Honour: How do you?
Well, enough of Complements, I am come with a Petition to you.
What is that, is it please your Honour?
A Suit.
Byrlaken I have need of one, for I have but poor and bare cloth∣ing on.
No, Roger, it is a request and desire I have you should grant.
Grant, or to Farm let, no Sir, I will not part with my Lease.
Roger, you understand me not, therefore let me speak with Maudlin your Wife.
There she is Sir, spare her not, for she is good metal I'll warrant your Honour; wipe your lips Maudlin, and answer him every time that he moves thee, and give him as good as he brings: Maudlin, were he twenty Lords, hold up your head, Maudlin, be not hollow.
I'll warrant you Husband, I'll satisfy him.
Honest Maudlin.
That's more than your Lordship knows.
Why then Maudlin.
That's my name indeed.
You have a maid here in your house.
I hope so forsooth; but I will not answer for no Virgin in this wicked world.
Well said Maudlin; Nay your Honour will get nothing of my Maudlin, I'll warrant you.
Well, this supposed Maid is Poor Virtue, that's her name, I de∣sire you will let her live with me, this Poor Virtue.
God bless you Honour from her, it is not fit for a Lord, and a great Noble-man to meddle with Virtue, your Honour should not foul your fingers with her: Besides, she will never stay in a great mans house, neither is it fit she should; and your Honours servants will hate her like the Devil, for she will please no body as she should do, a very peevish, ill-natured girl forsooth she is.
Why how doth she agree then with you?
Alas forsooth, if it please your Honour, Virtue may live in a Cottage, when she will be whipped out of a Court, or a great Lords Palace; they may talk of her, but they will never give her leave to live and board with them: It may be they give their Chaplain leave to talk of her a Sun∣days, or so forsooth, but talk's but talk, for they forget her the six days after,
and never mind her; for indeed she is a very peevish girl, and not fit for Gentlefolks company, that's the truth of it, hardly for poor folks.
Why you agree well with her?
Nay by the faith of my body do I not; for I can hardly go to Market, and be merry, as I use to be, and all long of her peevishness: nay I cannot go to order one of our busy Thrashers, but she troubles me; or to speak with the Carter, but she whip, in presently, or discourse with the Plough-man about his plough-share, how he should order it for my advan∣tage, but she troubles me; or about our Husbandman, how and where he should sow his Seed, but she vexes me still: Such a life, the Gods help me, as I am even weary of my self. Speak Roger, is it not true?
True Maudlin as steel, I never was merry since she was in my house, the May-pole is down since she came.
I Roger that it is, the more the pity.
And the Towns Green is a Meadow, and the poor Big-pipers cheeks are fallen into a Consumption, hardly wind to speak withal; the Morris-dan∣cers bells are silenced, and their cross garters held superstitious, idolatrous, and profane; the May-Lord and his Lady deposed, and the Hobby-horse is forgotten; nay the Whitson-Lord and Lady are banished, Merry Wakes oboe∣lish'd, and the poor Ale-wives beggared,
I, I, and all since this melancholy girl Virtue came into our house.
I cannot choose but cry.
Thou art true Maudlin then.
Yes, with small beer, that's the calamity of it; therefore bless every good subject from so melancholy a thing as this girl Virtue is: But we have a Daughter, and it please your Honours worship, that will give you good content, and please most of your Household; for she is a lusty Wench, though I say it that should not say it: Did you but see her swim like a Tench on our Town-green, encircling the May-pole, and at the end of a Horn-pipe, when she is to be kissed, how modestly the wries her head away, but so as to be civil; nay she hath been well Educated, my own natural Daughter, for in∣deed Roger, I was with Child with her before you married me.
Peace Maudlin, all Truths are not to be spoken of; for should that be, many a Worshipful Person would be very angry; but our Vicar made all well betwixt thee and me, Maudlin: But I beseech your Honour take my Daughter, for you will find her another manner of woman than Virtue is, for she is not like her in faith, nor any thing that belongs to her, she is better blessed than so.
No, I will have Poor Virtue, or none.
Faith if you have Virtue, you are sure to have her poor, for I never knew any of her Family rich, the Gods do not bless them, I think, in this world; but if you will have her, take her, shall he not, Maudlin?
Yes, Husband, and the house is well rid of her, and let us bless our selves for it; for now we shall be like our Neighbours again, we will not abate them an hair, the best in the Parish shall not live merrier than we will now for all Sports: Why, Vanity and Sin, Husband, is the Liberty of the Subject, and the seven Deadly Sins are the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, from the greatest to the least, if poor folks might have their right. Well, your Honour shall have her, but you will be as weary of her as we have been, the Gods bless your Honour, but alas you do not know what this
Girl Virtue is, Lords have no guess at her.
Well Maudlin, let me have her, I desire no more.
Nor we neither, if it pleases your Honour, and so the Gods give you good of her.
Let me speak to his Honour, Maudlin.
Do so Roger.
I give yourdship many thanks.
For what?
For ridding our house of this troublesome Girl.
And I thank you for it too.
When thanks on all sides happen, we are eased.
And I with your Poor Virtue am well pleased.
Mark the end of it, Roger.
Yes Maudlin, the End Crowns the Work.
What always musing? Shall I never find thee in a sociable humour?
I would you had come sooner, or stayed longer away.
Why prithee?
I will tell you: A while since, there came the Muses to visit me, being all either mad, or drunk, for they tossed and tumbled me, and rumbled me about, from one to the other, as I thought they would a dive∣ded me amongst them: At last came in the Sciences to visit me, with sober Faces, grave Countenances, stayed and formal Behaviours, and after they had Saluted me, they began to talk very seriously to me, their Discourse being Rational, Probable, Wise, Learned, and Experienced; but all the while the Muses would not let me alone, one pulled me to Dance, another to Sing, another to play on Music, others to recite Verses, speak Speeches, and Act parts of Plays, and the like• Whereupon I gravely turned the in∣corporal head of my rational Soul, nodding it to them to be quiet, and let me alone, but still they played with me: At last my Thoughts, which are the language of the Soul, spoke to them, and prayed them to forbear, until such time as the Sciences were gone; but they would not be quiet, nor silent, doe
what I could, but would interrupt the Sciences in the midst of their Dis∣course, with their idle Rimes, light Fancies, and odd Numbers, insomuch as the Sciences departed: Whereupon the Muses did rejoice, and skip, and run about, as if they had been wilde: And in this jocund humour, in came the Arts, even a whole Common-wealth; for there were not only Politic Arts, Civil and Combining Arts, Profitable and necessary Arts, Military Arts, and Ceremonious Arts; but there were Superstitious Arts, Idol∣trous Arts, false, factious, and mischievous Arts, destructive and wicked Arts, base and mean Art, foolish, childish, vain, superfluous and unprofita∣ble Arts: Upon all these Arts the Muses made good sport; for at some they flung jests, scorns, and scoffs, and some they stripped naked, but to others they were cruel, for some they stayed their skins off, and others they made very Skeletons of, dissecting them to the very bones; and the truth is, they spa∣red not the best of them, but they had one saying or other to them: But when all the Arts departed, they took me, and carried to the Well of Heli∣con, and there they threw me in over head and cares, and said they would Souse me in the Liquor of Poetry; but when I was in the Well, I thought verily I should have been drowned, for all my outward Senses were smo∣ther'd and choked, for the water did blind my eyes, stopped my ears and no∣strils, and filled my mouth so full, as I had not so much space as to spout it sorth; besides all my body was so numb, as I had no feeling, insomuch, as when they took me out of this Well of Helicon, into which they had flung me, I seemed as dead, being quite senseless: Whereupon they all agreed to take and carry me up on Parnassas Hill, and to lay me on the 〈◊〉 thereof, that the Poetical Flame, or Heat therein, might dry and warm me; after which agreement they took me up, every one bea•ing a part o• m•, or was industrious about me, for some carried my Head, others my Legs, some held my Hands, others embraced my Waste, another oiled my Tongue, and o∣theirs powered Spirits into my Mouth, but the worst-natur'd Muse pinched me, to try if I was sensible, or not, and the sweetest and tenderest natured Muse wept over me, and another was so kind as to kiss me; but when they had brought me up to the top of the Hill, and laid me thereupon, I felt such a heat, as if they had laid me on AEtna; but after I had lain some time, I felt it not so hot, and so less and less, until I felt it like as my natural heat; just like those that go into a hot Bathe, at first cry out it is insufferable and scalding hot, yet with a little use will sinde it cool enough: But whilst I lay on Parnassus Hill, I began to make a Lyric Verse, as thus.
Bright, Sparkling hot Poetic sire,
My duller Muse Inspire
Unto thy Sweeter Lyre:
My Fancies like as Notes all sit
To play a Tune of Wit
On well-strung Numbers fit.
But your unfortnnate Visit hath pulled me so hastily down from the Hill, that the force of the speed hath cracked my Imaginary Fiddle, broke the Strings of my Wit, blotted the Notes of Numbers, so spoiled my Song.
Prithee, there is none that would have taken the pains to have sung thy Song, unless some blind Fiddler in an Alehouse, and then not any one would have listened unto it, for the fume of the drink would stop the
sense of their ears: Besides, Drunkards love not, nor delight in nothing but beastly Nonsense; but howsoever I had done thee a friendly part, to fetch thee down from off that monstrous high Hill, whereby the vastness of the height might have made you so dizzy, as you might have fallen there-from on the sharp stones of Spite, or at least, on the hard ground of Censure, which might have bruised, if not wounded the Reputatio of thy Wit.
Let me tell you, you had done me a Curtsy to have let me remained there some time; for if you had let me alone, I might there have improved the Stature of my Wit, perfected the Health of my Judge∣meant, and had nourished the Life of my Muse.
Still I fear my fault is beyond a Pacification, yet the Gods are pacified with submissive Actions, as bended knees, repentant tear, im∣ploring words, sorrowful Sighs, and dejected Countenances, all which I gave to thee.
Though there is always in my mind an obedient respect to Merit, yet a scorn is a sufficient cause to make a rebelling of thoughts, words, and actions; for though I am poor, yet I am virtuous, and Virtue is to be pre∣ferr'd before Wealth or Birth, were I meanly born. But howsoever, true Love, like a great and powerful Monarch, soon disperses those rebellious passions, and quiets those factious thoughts, and all murmuring speeches, or words, are put to silence, banishing all frowning Countenance, returning humble looks into the eyes again.
Then you have pardoned me.
Yes.
And do you love me?
As Saints do Heaven.
Your Favours have raised my spirits from the grave of Melan∣choly, and your pure Love hath given me a new Life.
So truly I love you, as nothing but death can destroy it; my, I am of that belief, that were I dead, and turned to ashes, my dust, like firm and lasting steel, would fly unto you, as to the Loadstone, if you were at such distance as nothing might oppose.
Thus Souls, as well as Bodies, love.
Since I cannot have the happiness of your Lordships company at my House, I am come to wait upon you at your House.
Your Ladyship doth me too great an honour.
Your Lordship is grown very Courtly. Pray how comes our familiar friendship so estranged, and set at distance with Comple∣mints?
Madam, my wilde manners have been so rude to your Fair Sex, as I am become a scorn and shame unto my self.
I hate Civility and Manners in a man, it makes him ap∣pear sneakingly, poorly, and effeminate, and not a Cavalier: Bold and free Actions become your Sex.
It doth so in a Camp amongst rude and rough Soldiers, whose Breeding never knew Civility, nor will obey gentle Commands, sub∣meting only to rigorous Authority: But to the fair, tender, effeminate Sex, men should offer their service by their admiring Looks, civil Discourses, and humble Actions, bowing as to a Deity; and when they are pleased to fa∣four their servants, those Favours to be accounted beyond the Gifts of Jove.
Have I Cuckolded my Husband, dishonoured my Family, defamed my self for your sake, and am I thus rewarded and thrown aside with civil Complements? O basest of men!
I am sorry I have wronged your Husband, but more sorry I have dishonoured you, and what satisfaction a true repentance can make, I offer upon the Altar of a Reformed Life.
Do you repent? O false man! May you be cursed of all your Sex, and die the death of Orpheus.
It is beyond the power of Jove to please the various humours of Woman-kind.
There was never so many Noble Persons Married in one day, in one City, I think, before those that are to Marry to more∣row.
Who are they?
Why, do you not hear?
No.
Surely you have been either dead or deaf.
I have been in the Country.
That is some reason indeed; but the News of the City uses to travel in Letters on Post-horses into the Country.
No faith, for the most part they come in slow Waggons; but tell me who those are that are to be Married to morrow?
Why first there is the Lord Title and the Lady Virtue. Se∣condly, the Lord Courtship and the Lady VVard. Thirdly, there is Sir Famit Poet and the Lady Contemplation. Fourthly, the Lady Conversation and Sir Experienced Traveller. And fifthly, the Lady Visitant and Sir Humphrey In∣terruption.
I will do my endeavour to see them all; for I will go to each Bridal House.
How will you do so, being all married on a day?
Why I will bid Good-morrow to the one, and I will go to Church with another, and dine with the third, and dance the afternoon with the fourth, and see the fifth a bed.
That you may do.
Lord there are so many Weddings to be to morrow, as I know not which to go to! Besides, I shall displease those I go not to, being invited to them all.
If you would displease neither of them, you must seign your self sick, and go to none of them.
None of them, say you? that would be a cause to make me die; for I would not but be a guest to one of them for any thing could be given me: But I am resolved to go to the Lady Conversation and Sir Ex∣perienc'd Travellers Wedding, for there there will be the most company, and it is company that I love better than the Wedding-cheer; for much company is a Feast to me.
Truly Mistress, I wonder you should delight in company, you being in years.
Out you naughty Wench, do you say I am old?
No indeed, I did not name old.
Then let me tell you, that those women that are in years, seek company to divulge their Wit, as youth to divulge their Beauty; and we Aged Wits may chance to catch a Lover from a young Beauty: But I should applaud my own wit, if it could contrive to bring each Bride and Bridegroom into one Assembly, making Hymen's Monarchy a Republic, where all should be in common.
So Mistress you would prove a Traitor to Hymen, which is a Bawd.
Faith I will turn you away for your boldness.
I am come to tell you, that the five Bridals meet with their Guests and good Cheer at the City-Hall, and make their several Comp∣niece Joining as one, as one Body, and there will be such Revelling, as the like was never before.
Iuno be thanked, and Venus be praised for it; for I was much perplexed concerning their Divisions, till you came and brought me this good News of their Corporation.
Come Old Humanity, and be our Father, to join and give us in the Church; and then when we are Married, we will live a Country-life, I as a Shepherd, and this Lady as my Fair Shepherdess.
My dear Child, you appear as a sweet budding Rose this morning.
Roses are beset with thorns, Nurse, I hope I am not so.
By'r Lady your Husband may prove a thorn, if he be not a good man, and a kind Husband; but Oh my heart doth ache.
Wherefore doth it ache?
Come Sweet, are you ready? for it is time to go to Church, it is almost twelve a clock.
I am ready, but my Nurse doth affright me, by telling me her heart doth ache, as if she did fore-know by her experien'd age some ill for∣tune towards me, or that I shall be unhappy in my marriage.
Her heart doth not ache for you, but for her self, because she cannot be a young fair bride, as you are, as being past her youth; so that her heart doth ache out of a sad remembrance of her self, not for a present, or a future cause for you.
Well, well, I was young indeed, and a comely bride when I was married, though I say it, and had a loving bridegroom, Heaven rest his soul.
Come, I have brought all my bridal guests hither to join with yours, for we will go to Church together: Wherefore prithee come away, our Bridegrooms and our Guests stay for you.
I will go to them by and by.
Why, I hope you do not stay to muse upon Phantasms, saith Marriage will banish them out of your head, you must now employ your time with Realities.
If I thought Marriage would destroy or disturb my Con∣templations, I would not marry, although my Wedding-guests were come, and my Wedding-dinner ready dressed, and my Wedding-cloaths on; nay, were I at the holy Altar, I would return back.
That would be such an action, as all the Kingdom would say you were mad.
I had rather all the World should not only say I were mad, but think me so, rather than my self to be unhappy.
Can want of Contemplation make you unhappy?
Yes, as unhappy as a body can be without a soul; for Con∣templation is the life of the soul, and who can be happy that hath a dead soul?
By my troth I had rather be dead, than have such a dull life.
Madam, the Bridegroom is coming hither.
I will prevent him, and meet him.
Come away, come away, they'll be all married before we shall get to Church.
There will be enough Witnesses, we may well be spared; but so I share of the Feast, I care not whether they be married or not.
The truth is, the benefit to us will be only in eating of their meat, and drinking of their wine.
And I mean to be drunk, but not for joy of their Marriages, but for pleasure of my Gusto.
What Lines of Light doe from those Torches spin,
Which winds about those Ladies whiter skin?
But from their Eyes more Splend'rous Beams doe run,
As bright as those that issue from the Sun.
Wherein the lesser Lights wax dull and dim,
Or like as Minnes in an Ocean swim.
By your good leave Gentlefolks,  I am come here to complain of this Hog-grubber
Sir Golden Riches, who did tempt me with Gold till he had his desire, you know all what it is, and I like an honest woman, as it were, kept my word, and performed truly as any woman could do: Speak, can thou detect me either in word or deed? and like a false and covetous wretch as thou art, performed nothing with me as thou should have done, I am sure of that: Is it not a truth? speak coverous wretch, speak.
Why, what did I promise you?
Why thou did promise me an hundred pounds in gold, showed it me, and then took it away again; nay further, thou said I should be a Lady, and have a great parimanus Coach gilt, with neighing Horses, and a Coachman, with a Postilion to ride before: Nay, nay, I remember well e∣nough what you said, you talked of Gesemond, Pomatum, and Roman Gunpow∣der for my hair, and fine gowns and stockings, and sine laced silk garters, and roses shining like Stars, God bless us!
Did I, did I?
Yes, that you did, you know what you did, and how you did, and so do I; and Gentlefolks as I am a true woman, which he knows I am, I never had more than this white fustion waistcoat, and three pence to buy me three pennyworth of pins, for he would allow me no incle to tie it withal, and this old stamel petticoat, that was his great Grand∣mothers in Eighty eight, I am no two-legged creature else.
But I bought you velvet to guard it withal.
Yes, that's true, an old black velvet Jerkin without sleeves, that had belonged to one of Queen Elizabeth her learned Counsel in the Law of blessed Memory, primo of Her Reign, and you bought it of an old Broker at Nottingham; and as I am a true Christian woman, if our Neigh∣bore Botcher could almost few it on, it was so mortified.
I bought you shoes, and ribbons to tie them withal.
Look Gentlefolks, a pair of wet-leather shoes, that have given me a Cold, and two leather points that he calls ribbons, like a lying false man.
I am sure I bought you stockings and garters.
Old Doncaster-stockins, that I was sain to wash my self with a little borrowed soap, and they were footed with yellow fustion too, and the garters he talks of were lists of cloth, which a Taylor gave me for my New-years-gift, and I cannot choose but grieve to see his unkindness; I gave you satisfaction often, but you never satisfied me, I will take it upon my death.
Go Gill Flirt, pack away hence.
Nay that puts me in mind of the Peddlers pack you pro∣missed me, and I never had so much bought as that I might whissle for them; but I will follow thee to Hell, but I will have something more out of thee than I have had, or else I will make all the Town ring of me.
Here Beadles, take her to the Correction-house, Bridewell, and let her be punished.
Is it so, thou miscreant? well, I thought to be thy Bride, and not Bridewell, I never thought it in my conscience.
Pray stay.
Mall, although you deceived me, and broke your promise, you I will not only save you from the punishment you were to suffer at the Cor∣rection-house, but I will give thee a Husband here, lusty Thom. Purveyor, to whom, for taking thee to Wife, I will give him a lease of fifty pounds a year. Here Tom, take her and go marry her.
Heaven bless your Honour.
Come Mall, let us go Wed, for fifty pounds a year is better than thy Maiden-head.

I would my Parents had kept me up as birds in dark∣nos, when they are taught to sing Artificial Tunes, that my ears only might have been employed; and as those Teachers whistle to birds several times, so would I have had Tutors to have read to me several Authors, as the best Poets, the best Historians, the best Philosophers, Moral and Natural, the best Grammarians, Arithme∣ticians, Mathematicians, Logicians, and the like. Thus perchance I might have spoke as eloquently upon every subject, as Birds sing sweetly several tunes; but since my Education hath been so negligent, I wish I might do some no∣ble Action, such as might raise a monumental Fame on the dead Ashes of my Fore-fathers, that my Name might live everlastingly.
I hate to be compared to an inferior, or to have an inferior compared to me: wherefore if I were Jove, I would damn that creature that should compare me to any thing less than my self.
Your Ladyship is like a Goddess, above all comparison: where∣fore I think there is none worthy to match in Marriage with you, unless there were some Masculine Divine Creature on Earth to equal you, as surely there is none.
I shall not willingly marry, unless it were to have a command o∣ver my Husband.
But Husbands, Madam, command Wives.
Not those that are Divine Creatures.
Husbands, Madam, are Reprobates, and regard not Divinity, nor worship Earthly Deities.
Whilst they are Suitors, they worship, and women command their wooing servants.
The truth is, all Suitors do worship with an Idolatrous zeal, but their zeals tire at length, as most zeals do, and men are content to be com∣manded, whilst they are Courting servants, and do obey with an industry∣os
care, and with an humble and respectful Demeanour, a submissive and awful Countenance, with an admiring and listening Ear, pleasing and ap∣placing Speech, insomuch as their Mistress might think they commanded not only their Senses, but also their Souls; yet after they are married, they be∣come from being servants, to be Masters, and they are so far from obeying, as they command, and instead of an humble and respectful demeanour, and an awful countenance, they will be haughty and surly, and their faces will be clothed in frowns, and instead of an admiring eye and a listening ear, they will neither regard nor take notice of their Wives, unless it be to throw a scornful glance, and instead of a pleasing and applausing speech, they will reprove, discommend, or threaten. Thus, although they serve as Slaves when they are wooing Suitors, yet they rule as Tyrants when they are Husbands, as all Slaves do that come to rule, prove Tyrants, like as the most fierce zealous Supplicants oft-times prove Atheists, or Reprobates.
Then I must never marry; for I cannot endure to be command∣ed, but must be admired and adored.
It is fit you should, being a Divine Creature, Madam.
Women that love the Courtship of men, must change themselves into as many several humours as Protheus shapes; as sometimes gay and merry, sometimes grave and majestic, sometimes me∣lancholy, sometimes bashful and coy, sometimes free and confident, some∣times patient, and sometimes choleric, sometimes silent, and sometimes dis∣cursive, according as they find those humours they meet with.
Let me tell you, Wanton, they must love Courtship well, that will take such pains to transform themselves so often, to please, or rather to get Lovers.
You say well, Ease, but they rather lose than gain by the bar∣gain; for the charge of troublesome observance, is more than the profit they receive therefrom.
Truly, Mistress Temperance, there is no delight in pains-taking, ask my Lady Pleasure.
No truly Ease; but a sweet civility, a modest behaviour and countenance, and a pleasing speech, gains more Lovers than a metamor∣phos'd humour.
In truth a well-temper'd humour is easy to themselves, and delightful to others.
You speak for Lovers, but there is a difference betwixt Court∣ship and Love; for dull Love is contented to be entertained only with plain truth, and is constant to an honest heart, but sprightly Courtship delights in extravagances, lives in varieties, but dies in particulars or singularities.
True delight lives in true love.
And true Love lives in Temperance.
And Temperance lives in Ease.
And Ease lives in Idleness.
And Idleness lives in Wantonness, and Wantonness lives in Pleasure.
Let me tell you, Wanton, that Pleasure doth not live in Wan∣tonnes nor Idleness; for Pleasure lives in Peace, maintained by Plenty, instructed by Prudence, protected by Justice, and governed by Grave Tempe∣rance here.
All the Ladies in the City are in love with me, and that woman thinks her self happy that can receive a Courtship from me; but I mean to marry none but Mademoiselle Ambition, nor would I marry her but for my particular ends, for she is rich.
She is so, if they be rich that have vast desires. But are you sure you shall have her?
Yes, for her Friends and I am agreed, and I know she can∣not deny me; for what woman would not be proud to marry me?
It is said she is a Noble Lady.
Faith she will be but a trouble to me; but I will only keep her for breed, and entertain myself, and lead my life with Mademoiselle Pleasure, and she shall share of the riches that Mademoiselle Ambition brings.
Now you talk of riches Sir, what shall we do with the rich Ca∣binet you bought? must that be carried to Mademoiselle Pleasure?
Yes, but I have other presents to send along with it, which I will give order for.
Live under these laws? I will sooner live under the Turks.
What makes thee such an enemy to these laws, Monsieur Sensuality?
Why Monsieur Censure, I am fined a hundred pounds for kiss∣sing a Mistress, and getting a child.
Indeed the Turks government is the only government for such men as would have many Wives, Concubines, and Slaves.
Why, he is a slave that lives not under such government; for what greater slavery is there than to be tied to one woman? I am sure our Fore-fathers, who were godly men, were not tied to such slavery; they had
their liberty as the Turks, and such like wise governments, a to have as ma∣ny Wives and Mistresses as they please, or at least as many as they can maintain.
Although you may think that government wise, because it fits your Appetite, yet well-tempred men, it is likely, will be of another opine∣on, as to think the strict Canon-Laws of Europe are better for the good of Commonwealths, and every particular Family, by restraining one man to one woman, than to let them have more, or as many as they will.
If well-temperd men be of that opinion, they are fools, which I will soon prove them to be. As first for the Common-wealth, there is no∣thing more disadvantageous; for those Commonwealths flourish with great∣est glory, that are fullest populated, by reason populated Kingdoms are strongest, both for their own defence, and against Foreign Enemies, as being able to conquer others by Invasions, enlarging their Dominions with their numbers, increasing their numbers with their numerous issues, begot and born from their many Wives, Concubines, and Slaves: when by our niggardly laws Kingdoms become uninhabited and barren for want of men to till and manure the ground: And as for our Wars, they'd seem as private Chal∣lenges, and our Armies as particular Duellers, being met with their Se∣conds to decide their petty quarrels, and to show their valour by the ha∣zard of their lives, and our Battles seem slight Skirmishes, or like a Company or Rout that kill each other in an idle Fruy. Thus in comparison of other Em∣peers, all Europe is but as one Kingdom, for numbers of men, and Martial Forces, when by the Extent it may be accounted the fourth part of the known World. And as for particular Families, want of children breeds discontent, and not only destroys industry, but makes spoil and unthrifts; for those that have no children, they care not what becomes of their goods, lands, or livings, spending them through cluelesness, or through riot: And as for Women, it spoils them from being good wives; for being sole Mi∣stresses, having no Co-partners, nor Shares, neither of their Husbands, i will∣drone, or estates, and being the only She that is served or attended, embraced, loved, or maintained, grows proud, imperious, insults and domineers, and disputes with her Husband for pre-eminence, and the truth is, for the most part, obtains it. Thus men become slaves to the distaff for quietness sake, o∣therwise there is such quarrels and brawleries, that his house and home, that should be his Couch of Ease, his Bed of Rest, his peaceable Haven, or haven of Peace, is for the most part his couch of thorns, his bed of cares, his hell of torments, or tormenting hell, and his whole Family are like a tempestuous Sea, where Passions hurl into Factions, and rise in waves of discontent: But when men have an absolute power over their wives, they force them into quiet obedience; and where men have many Wives, Con∣cubines, and Slaves, the women are humbled into a submission, each woman striving which should be most serviceable, and who can get most love and favour; and as for Bastards, they are as much the Fathers children, as those that are got in Wedlock.
But it is likely that Concubines and slaves will be false, and fa∣there their children on those that never begot them.
Why so may Wives, and it is most probable they do so; but as other Nations do allow many Wives, Concubines, and slaves, so they give men power and rule to govern and restrain them; and the men are so wise in other Nations, as they suffer no other men but themselves to come
near them, hardly to look at the outside of their Seraglio's, as that part of the house they are lodged in.
Thou hast spoke so well, and hast made so learned a Speech for many Wives, Concubines, and slaves, as I am converted, and will, if thou wilt, travel into such Kingdoms as allow such numbers and varieties, that I may be naturalised to their liberties.
What is the reason, Monsieur Satirical, you do not marry?
The reason, Monsieur Inquisitive, is, that I cannot find a wife fit for me.
Why, there are women of all Ages, Births, Humours, Sty∣tures, Shapes, Complexions, Features, Behaviours, and Wits. But what think you of marrying the Lady Nobilissimo?
She is a Lady that out-reaches my Ambition.
What think you of the Lady Bellissimo?
She is a Lady for Admiration, and not for use.
What think you of marrying the Lady Piety?
She is a Lady to be prayed unto as a Saint, not to be embraced as wife.
What think you of the Lady Modesty?
She is a Lady that will not only quench amorous love, but the free matrimonial love.
What do you think of the Lady Sage?
She is a Lady to rule as a Husband, and not to be ruled as a Wife.
What think you of the Lady Politic?
She is a Lady fitter for Counsel than for Marriage.
What say you to the Lady Ceremony?
She is a Lady fitter for a Princely Throne, than the Mari∣age-bed.
What say you to the Lady Poetical?
She is a Lady fitter for Contemplation than Fruition.
What say you to the Lady Humility?
She is a Lady sooner won than enjoyed.
What say you to the Lady Sprightly?
She is a Lady that will disquiet my rest, being fitter for dancing than sleeping.
What say to the Lady Prodigal?
She is a Lady I might feast with, but could not thrive with.
What say you to the Lady Vanity?
She is a Lady too various and extravagant for my humour.
What say you to the Lady Victoria?
She is a Lady I had rather hear of, than be enslaved by.
What say you to the Lady Innocent Youth?
She is a Lady that may please with embracing, but not with con∣versing; she is fitter for love than for company, for Cupped than for Pallas, for sport than for counsel.
What say you to the Lady Wanton?
She is fitter for an hour than for an Age.
What say you to the Lady Poverty?
She is fitter for my Charity than my Family.
What say you to the Lady Ill-favoured?
She is a Lady fitter for a Nunnery than a Nursery; for Beads, than for Children.
What say you to the Lady Weakly?
She is fitter for Death than for Life; for Heaven, than the World.
By your Answers I perceive you will not Marry.
Have I not reason, when I can find such Answers from the Sex?
But the Gods have commanded Marriage?
But Saints doe choose a single life, and in case of Marriage, I will sooner follow the Example of the Saints, than the commands of the Gods.
Ladies, what think you of good Husbands?
I think well of good Husbands.
But it is a question whether good Husbands will think well of us.
I think good Husbands may be in our thoughts, but not actually in the World.
I am of your opinion, they may be mentioned in our words, but not found in our lives.
Faith we may hear of good husbands, and read of good wives, but they are but Romances.
You say right; for we may as soon find an Heroic Lover, and see all his impossible Actions out of a Romance Book, as a good Hus∣bands; but as for Wives, I will not declare my Opinion.
Nor I; but were there such men that would make good hus∣bands, it were as difficult to get them, as for a Romantic Lover to get his Mistress out of an Enchanted Castle.
For my part I had rather die a Maid, than take the pains to get a good Husband.
I wonder our Sex should desire to Marry; for when we are un∣married, we are sued and sought to, and not only Mistress of our selves, but our Suitors: But when we are married, we are so far from being Mistresses, as we become slaves.
The truth is, there is no Act shows us, or rather proves us to be so much fools as we are, as in marrying: for what greater folly can there be, than to put our selves to that condition which will sorce us to sue to pow∣er, when before that voluntary slavery we were in a condition to use power, and make men sue to us.
We must confess, when we well consider, it is very strange, since every Creature naturally desires and strives for pre-eminence, as to be supe∣riour, and not inferior; for all Creatures endeavour to command, and are unwilling to obey; for it is not only Man, but even the Beasts of the Field, the Birds of the Air, and the Fishes in the Sea; and not only Beasts, Birds, and Fish, but the Elements those creatures inhabit in, strive for superiori∣tie; only Women, who seem to have the meanest souls of all the Creatures Nature hath made; for women are so far from endeavouring to get power, as they voluntarily give away what they have.
Talk not of women's souls, for men say we have no souls, only beautiful bodies.
But beautiful bodies are a degree of souls, and in my Con∣science please men better than our souls could do.
If anything prove we have no souls, it is in letting men make such fools of us.
Come, come Ladies, by Women's Actions they prove to have more, or at least better souls than Men have, for the best parts of the Soul are Love and Generosity, and Women have more of either than Men have.
The truth is, that although Reason and Understand∣ing are the largest parts of the Soul, yet Love and Generosity are the delica∣test parts of the Soul.
Goodmorrow young Ladies, you appear this morning like sweet-smelling flowers, some as Roses, others as Lilies, others as Violets, Pinks, and Primroses, and your associating in a company together, is like as a Posy which Love hath bound up into one Bucket, which is a sit Present for the Gods.
If you would have us presented to the Gods, we must die; for we are never preferred to them but by Death: wherefore we must be go∣ven to Death, before the Gods can have us; they may hear us whilst we live, and we may hear of them, but partake of neither until we die.
O that were pity, Ladies; for there is nothing more sad in Na∣ture, than when Death parts a witty Soul from a young beautiful Body, be∣fore the one hath built Monuments of Memory, and the other gained Trow∣phies of Lovers: And as for the Gods, you will be as acceptable to them when you are old, as when you are young.
As nothing could make me so sad as untimely death of Youth, Wit, and Beauty, so there is nothing could anger me more, as for Fortune to frown upon Merit, or not to advance it according to its worth, or to bury it in Oblivion, hindering the passage into Fems Palace.
For my part, I believe Death will neither call nor come for you before his natural time, if you do not send Surfeit and Excess to call him to take you away.
Indeed Mankind seem as if they were Deaths Factors; for they
do strive to engross and destroy all other creatures, or at least as many as they can; and not only other creatures, but their own kind, as in Wars; and not only their own kind, but themselves, in idle and unprofitable Adven∣tures, and gluttonous Excess, thus as I said, they are Deaths Factors, buying sickness with health, hoping to gain pleasure, and to make delight their pro∣fit, but they are cozened, for they only get Diseases, Pains, and Aches.
Pray Ladies mark how far you are gone from the Text of your discourse, as from sweet-smelling flowers to stinking carrion, which are dead carcasses; from a lively good-morrow, to a dead farewell; from mirth to sadness.
You say right, Mother Matron; wherefore pray leave off this dis∣course, for I hate to hear off death; for the thoughts of death affright me so, as I can take no pleasure of life when he is in my mind.
Why Ladies, the thought of death is more than death himself; for thoughts are sensible or imaginable things, but Death himself is neither sensible nor imaginable.
Therefore I would not think of him; and when I am dead, I am past thinking.
Let us discourse of something that is more pleasing than Death.
Then by my consent, Ladies, your discourse shall be of Venus and Cupped, which are Themes more delightful to your Sex, and most country∣rye to death; for Love is hot, and Death is cold; Love illuminates life, and Death quenches life out.
Let me tell you Sir, Love is as apt to burn life out, as Death is to quench it out, and I had rather die with cold, than be burnt with heat; for cold kills with a dead numness, when heat kills with a raging mad∣ness.
But Lovers are tormented with fears and doubts, which cause cold sweats, fainting of spirits, trembling of limbs; it breaks the sweet re∣pose of sleep, disturbs the quiet peace of the mind, vades the colours of beau∣tie, nips or •lasts the blossom of youth, making Lovers look withered, be∣fore Time hath made them old.
It is a sign, Lady, you have been in love, you give so right a Character of a Lover.
No, there requires not a self-experience to find out a Lovers trouble, for the outward Actions will declare their inward grief and pas∣zion.
Certainly she is in love, but conceals it, she keeps it as a Secret.
Love cannot be secret, the passion divulges it self.
Confess, Are you not in love?
Nay she will never confess a Secret, unless you tell her one; for those that tell no secrets, shall hear none.
O yes, for a Secret is like a child in the womb; for though it be concealed for a time, it will come out at last, only some comes out easier than others, and some before their time.
Nay whenever a secret comes out, it's untimely.
Secrets are like Coy Ducks, when one is flown out, it draws out others, and returns with many.
Then like a Coy Duck I will try if I can draw all you after me.
She shall see she is like a Duck, which is like a Goose, and we like her, for we will follow her.
Have you been at Monsieur Busie's house, to tell him I desire to speak with him?
Yes, I have been at his house.
And will he come?
Faith Sir the house is too unwieldy to stir, and Monsieur Busy is too Active to stay at home: but the truth is, I went at four a clock this more∣ning, because I would be sure to find him and his servants, and their Master was flown out of his nest an hour before: Then I told his servants I would come about dinner-time, and they laughed, and asked me what time was that? I said I supposed at the usual time, about Noon, or an hour before or after, but they said their Master never kept any certain time of eating, be∣ing full of business. Then I asked them what time that would be when he would come home to bed: They answered, that his time of Resting was as uncertain as his time of Eating. Then I prayed them to tell me at what time they thought I might find him at home: They said it was impossible for them to guess, for that their Master did move from place to place, as swift as thoughts move in the Mind. Then I prayed them that they would tell him when he came home, that you would desire to speak with him: They told me they would, but they did verily believe he would forget to come to you, by reason his head was so full of busy thoughts, or thoughts of business, as there was no room more for a thought to stay in. So I went away in despair, but coming home, I chanced to see him at a little distance, so I made all the haste I could to overtake him, placing my Eyes fixedly upon him, because I would not lose him; but his pace was so swift, and his several turnings in se∣viral Lanes and Allies were so many, as it was impossible for me to keep my measure, pace, or sight, for like a Bird, he did not only fly out of my reach, but out of my view; but by a second good fortune, I met him just at your Gate, and I stopped his way until I had told him your Message, which was, you would speak with him: He answered me, he could not possibly stay, for his business called him another way. I told him, that if he did not come and speak with you, or stay until you did come and speak with him, his Law-sute, which was of great Importance, would be lost, for you could not do him any further service to your Friends, that should help him, until he had resolved you of some questions you were to ask him; besides that, you wanted a Writing that he had. He told me that he was very much obliged to you for your favour to him, but he could not possibly stay to speak with you, for he had some business to do for two or three other men, and he must of necessity go seek those men out whom the business concerned; so that I could not persuade him by any means, although for his own good, to come in, or to stay till you went to him.
Faith he is so busy, that he will neither do himself good
nor any other man; for he runs himself out of the Field of Business, being over-busy, neither holding the Reins of Time, nor sitting steady in the Seat of Judgment, nor stopping with the Bit of Discretion, nor taking the Advan∣tages of Opportunity; but totters with Inconstancy, and falls with Loss. Thus his busy thoughts do tire his Mind, so that his life hath a sorry, sore, and weary Journey.
I think he is a man that is full of Projects.
So full, as his head is stuffed with them, and he begins many designs, but never finishes any one of them; for his designs are built upon vain hopes, without a Foundation: But were his hopes solid with pro∣bability, yet his inconstancy, and unsteady doubts, and over-cautious care, would pull down, or ruin his designs before they were half built.
Monsieur Sensuality, let us examine you, What company have you met withal, that hath caused you to break your Word with us, when you had promised you would come, and carry us to a Play?
If he carry us all, he will carry a very heavy load.
Ladies should be heavy, and not light.
But Monsieur Sensuality, pray tell us where you have been, and with whom.
Why I have been with as proper a Lady as any is in this City.
What do you mean by a proper Lady?
He means a propped Lady.
I mean a Tall, Proportionable Lady, which is a comely sight.
Not to my Eyes; for I never see a tall big woman, but I think she rather proceeds from the race of Titan than Jove, for she seems to be more Body than Soul, more Earth than Flame.
For my part, I think there cannot be too much of a fair La∣die; and if I were to choose, I would choose her that had more body than soul, for her soul would be useless to me, by reason souls cannot be enjoyed as bodies are.
Yes, in a spiritual conversation they may.
I hate an incorporeal Conversation.
Why then you hate the Conversation of the Gods.
I love the Conversation and Society of fair young Ladies, such as you are.
That is not the Answer to my question.
Then let me tell you, Ladies, that most of our Sex do venture Heaven for your sakes, and will sooner disobey the Gods than you.
So you make as if Women commanded Men against the Gods.
No Lady, but we serve Women, when we should serve the Gods, and pray to your Sex, when the Gods would have us pray to them.
The more wicked creatures are men.
No, the more tempting creatures are women.
So you will make us Devils at last; for the original of temptation came from Pluto.
Temptation, Lady, was bred in Nature, born from Nature, and inhabits with all your Sex, as with Natures self, whom I have heard is a most beautiful Lady, and that is the reason, I suppose, she hath favoured women more than men, being her self of the Effeminate Sex: And the truth is, Nature hath been cruel to our Sex; for she hath not only made you so beautiful, as to be admired and desired, but so cruel, as to despise, reject and scorn us, taking pleasure in our torments.
If all Women were of my mind, we would torment you more than we do.
We have tormented him enough with talking, therefore let us leave him.
Nay Ladies, I will wait upon you.
Monsieur Satirical, I can tell you sad News.
Let sadness sit upon the grave of Death, for I defy it.
But that man is in danger that stands as a Centre in a Circumference from whence all the malignant passions shoot at him, as Suspicion, Spite, Envy, Hatred, Malice, and Revenge; and the more dangerous, by reason their Arrows are poisoned with Effeminate Rage.
Let them shoot, for I am armed with Carelessness, and have a Spell of Confidence, which will keep me safe. But who are they that are mine Enemies?
No less than a dozen Ladies.
If I can attain to fight with them apart, hand to hand, I make no question but to come off Conqueror; and if they assault me altogether, yet I make no doubt but I shall so skirmish amongst them, as I shall be on e∣qual terms. But what makes the breach of peace betwixt me and the La∣dies, and such a breach as to proclaim Open Wars?
The Cause is just, if it be true as it is reported.
Why what is reported?
It is reported you have divulged some secret favours those Ladies have given you.
It were ungrateful to conceal a favour: for favours proceed from generous and noble Souls, sweet and kind Natures.
But Ladies favours are to be concealed and locked up in the Closet of secrecy, being given with privacy, and promise not to divulge them; and it seems by report you have broke your promise, for which they swear to be revenged.
Faith all Women, especially Ladies, their natural humour is like the Sea, which will be neither quiet it self, always ebbing and flowing, nor let any thing be at rest on it: I know not what the Fishes are that are in it, but for any thing I can perceive to the contrary, they live in a perpetual motion: So doe Ladies; for their Passions and Affections ebb and flow from object to object; for one while they flow with love, then ebb with hate, sometimes they are rough with anger, and stormy with rage, then indifferent calm with patience, but that is seldom: But in the Spring-tide of Beauty they overflow all with pride, and their thoughts, like Fishes, are in a perpe∣tual motion, swimming from place to place, from company to company, from one meeting to another, and are never at rest.
Thou deserve to die the death of Orpheus.
It is likely I shall, by reason I am a Satirical Poet, and Women hate Satire in Poetry, although not Wood or Forest Satyrs; and the most extravagant and maddest Actions that ever were done, were done or acted by Women, and the truth is, Women are not only Batchelling some parts of the year, but all their life-long, for they drink vanity, and are mad-drunk with wantonness.
Let me tell you, that if I should be brought as a Witness, and should declare the truth, there were no hopes of mercy for thee.
I grant it, if Women were to be my Judges.
Where shall we go for pastime to day? for our Lady hath left us to our own: pleasures to day.
Let us go and swim in a Boat upon the River.
That is but a waterish Recreation; besides it is very dangerous, for many have been drowned in their idle pastimes.
If you will take my Counsel, let us go to the Lodge in the Park, and drink Sullybubs.
Yes, let us go, for the Lodge puts me into a good humour, and Sullybubs make me merry.
You have reason, for it is a cheerly Cup, and a Cup of good fellow∣ship, for we may all eat and drink together.
Yes by spoonfuls.
I love to be drunk by spoonfuls, for then I am drunk by degrees, and not at one draught, as a pint, or a quart at a draught, as men do; be∣sides, though it be allowable for the sobrest noblest Women to be drunk with Wine-caudles, Sullybubs, Sack-possets, and the like, so it be by spoon∣fuls, yet it were abominable and most dishonourable for Women to be
drunk with plain Wine, and great draught, as men are; besides, in great draughts there is not that pleasure of taste, as in a little at a time.
I believe that is the reason that Flemmings love to sip their Wine, be∣cause they would have the pleasure of Taste.
No question but they learned that of the Effeminate Sex, who love to taste of every thing.
I do believe it; for all women love spoon-meat.
It is true, and to drink in spoons.
Talk no more of eating and drinking, but eat and drink without talk∣ing, and afterwards talk to digest it.
And after it is digested, let's eat and drink again.
So we shall do nothing but eat, drink, and talk.
Women do nothing else all their life-long.
By your favour but we do.
Come, come, let us go.
O that I might enjoy those pleasures which Poets fancy, living in such delight as nature never knew; nor that all Poets did write of me, not only to express their Wit, but my Worth, and that I might be praised by all mankind, yet not vulgarly, as in a crowd of others praises, but my praises to be singularly enthroned above the rest, and that all others commendations might have no other light but what proceeds from the splendour of my Fame: Also I wish that Nature had made me such a Beauty, as might have drawn the Eyes of the whole World as a Loadstone to gaze at it, and the splendour thereof might have enlightened every blind eye, and the beams therefrom might have comforted every sad heart, and the pleasing Aspect therein might have turned all passions into love; then would I have had Nature, For∣tune, and the Fates, to have given me a free power of the whole World, and all that is therein, that I might have pressed and squeezed our the healing Bal∣somes, and sovereign Juices, and restoring Simples into every sick wounded and decayed body, and every disquieted or distempered mind: Likewise, that I might have been able to have relieved those that were poor and necessitous, with the hidden riches therein, and that by my power I might not only have obliged every particular creature and person, according to their worth and merit, but to have made so firm a peace amongst mankind, as never to be dissolved.
I wonder you should be an Enemy to Women.
I am so far from being an Enemy to the Effeminate Sex, as I am the best friend they have: for I do as a friend ought to do, which is, to tell them truth, when other men deceive them with flattery.
But they complain, and say you exclame and rail against them.
Their complaints proceed from their partial Self-love and Lu∣xury: for they love pleasing flattery, as they do Sweet-meats, and hate rigid truth, as they do a bitter potion, although the one destroys their health, the other prolongs their life.
But they are so angry, as they all swear, and have made a vow to be revenged on you.
Let them throw their spleens at me, I will stand their malice, or dart forth Amorous glances, they will not pierce my heart: for Pallas is my Shield, and Cupped hath no power.
If they cannot wound you with their Eyes, they will sting you with their Tongues, for Women are like Bees.
If they are like Bees, their stings lie not in their Tongues.
I can tell you News, Ladies.
What News, Mother Matron?
Why there is a rich young Heir come to Town.
Some foolish Son of a miserable Father, who hath spared from his back and belly, to make his Son vain and prodigal. But what shall we be the better for this rich Heir?
Why marry if you can get him, you will be so much the better as a rich Husband can make you.
He will first be got by the Cheats in the Town, which Cheats have more subtlety, and will be more industrious to get him, than the young∣est and beautifulest, and wittiest Lady of us all; so as there is no hopes of gaining him, until he is so poor, as he is not worth the having.
But if he could be had whilst he were rich, it were no great vi∣ctory; for I dare say his Mothers Landry-maid might be as soon a Conque∣ress, as a great Lady: But if we could conquer and imprison Monsieur Sa∣tyrical in Loves Fetters, that would be a Conquest worthy Fems Trum∣pet.
O that would be such an Exploit, as it would be an Honour to our Sex.
There is nothing I desire more, than to be she that might in∣fetter him.
I long to ensnare him.
So do I.
Faith I will lay an Ambuscado for him.
Fie Ladies, sie, I am ashamed to hear the Designs you have no catch Monsieur Satirical; such Fair, Young, Noble Ladies to be so wan∣ton, as none will content you but a wilde, rough, rude Satyr.
If I were sure there were no other ways to get him, I would become a Wood-nymph for his sake.
You have forgot the Nymph that was turned into a Bear.
O she was one of cruel Diana's Nymphs; but I will be none of her Order.
No, I dare swear you will not; for it is unlikely you should, when you desire to embrace a Satyr.
I do not desire to embrace him, but to enamour him.
Well, Ladies, your Parents gave you to my Care and Charge; but since you are so wilde, to talk of nothing but Nymphs, Woods, and Sa∣tiers, I will resign up the Trust which was imposed on me, to your Pa∣rents again; for I will not adventure my Reputation with such wanton young Ladies.
Mother Matron, let me tell thee, thy Reputation is worn out of thee, Time hath devoured it, and therefore thou hast no Reputation to lose.
Fath Tom. I have emptied thy pockets.
Thou hast picked my pockets with thy juggling Dice, for which, if thou were a woman, and in my power, I would be revenged for my loss.
Why, what would you do if I were a Woman?
I would condemn thee to a solitary silent life, which to a woman is worse than Hell; for company and talking is their Heaven, and their Tongues are more restless than the Sea, their Passions more stormy than the Winds, and their Appetites more unsatiable and devouring than fire; they are lighter than Air, more changing than the Moon.
What makes thee thus rail at the Effeminate Sex?
Have I not reason, when Fortune is of the same gender?
Faith Tom, I must tell.
What will you tell?
Why I will tell you, Lady, he hath railed most horribly against your Sex.
That is usual: for all those men which never received, nor hope to receive any favour from our Sex, will rail against it.
Those men have no reason, Lady, to commend you, if they no∣ver received neither profit nor pleasure from you; and those that have been cruelly used by your Sex, may lawfully rail against it.
The Laws of Honour forbid it.
But the Laws of Nature allow it, and Nature is the most pre∣veiling law.
Natures law is for Men to love Women, and Women Men, but in you and I there is not that Sympathy; for I dislike your Sex, as much as you do ours, and could rail with as free a will against it. The truth is, that although I do not hate men, yet I despise them; for all men appear to me either Beasts or Butter-flies, which are either sensual or vain: Indeed most men are worse than beasts; for beasts are but according to their kind, when men are degenerated by beastly Sensualies, from which they were made; for as most men are worse than beasts, so you are worse than most men.
It is a favour, Lady, from your Sex, to rail against ours; for it is a sign you have considered us, and that we live in your memory, although with your ill opinions; yet it is better to live with Enemies, than not to be; and of all men, I have received the greatest favour from the chiefest of your Sex, which is your self, in that you have considered me most, though you have found me worst, yet it proves you have thought of me.
If those thoughts and dispraises be favours, I will bind so many together, until they become as thick and hard as steel, of which you may make an Armour, to keep your Reputation from wounds of reproach.
There Tom. she hath paid thee both for thy Railings and Com∣plements.
She hath not paid me in current coin.
It will pass for disgrace, I'll warrant thee.
There are but three things a gallant man requires, which is, a Horse, a Sword, and a Mistress.
Yet a gallant man wants Generosity; for the greatest honour for a man, is to be generous; for Generosity comprises all Virtues, good Qualities, and sweet Graces; for a generous man will never spare his life, purse, nor labour, for the sake of just Right, plain Truth, Honest Poverty, Distress, Misery, or the like; for a generous man hath a courageous, yet compassionate Heart, a constant and noble Mind, a bountiful Hand, an active and industrious Life; and he is one that joys more to do good, than others to receive good.
There are few or none that have such noble Souls, as to prefer a∣nothers good before their own.
The truth is, men have more promising Tongues, than perform∣ing deeds.
For all I can perceive, mans life is composed of nothing but de∣ceit, treachery, and rapine.
Indeed mans mind is like a Forest, and his thoughts, like wilde beasts, inhabit therein.
Mans Mind is like a Sea, where his Thoughts, like Fishes, swim therein, where some Thought are like huge Leviathans, others like great Whales, but some are like Sprats, Shrimps, and Minus.
What is like a Minus?
A mans Soul.
It is better have a soul, although no bigger than a Minus, than none at all, as Women have; but if they have, I dare swear it is no bigger than a pins point.
Very like, which point pricks down thoughts into the Brain, and Passions in the heart, and writes in the Brain witty Conceits, if the point be sharp.
No, no, it serves only to raise their brains with Vanity, to engrave their hearts with Falsehood, and to scratch out their lives with Dis∣content.
We oftner scratch out men's lives than our own.
Nay, you oftner scratch out our honour than our lives.
For my part, I have an itch to be scratching.
I believe you, for you have a vexatious soul.
It hath cause to be vexatious, for the point of my soul is whetted with Aqua Fortis against your Sex.
I'm sure, Lady, your tongue is whetted with Aqua Fortis.
So is yours.
If it be, let us try which point is sharpest.
I will leave the Trial to Time and Occasion.
Madam, I am an humble Suitor to your Ladyship.
What is your suit?
That you will be pleased to take a young Maiden into your ser∣vice of my preferring.
In what place?
To wait and attend on your person.
Let me tell you, that those servants that attend on my person, do usually accompany me in all my Pastimes, Exercises, and sometimes in Con∣versation:
Wherefore they must be such as are well born, well bred, well behaved, modest, and of sweet dispositions, virtuous, and of strict life, other∣wise they are not for me; and if I find them not so, I shall soon turn them away.
Why Madam, even Diana her self, as severe and strict as she was, had some wanton Nymphs, that would commit errors; although they seem∣ed all sober and modest, and professed chastity, yet they would slip out of the way and her presence sometimes.
But she never failed to turn them out of her service, and some she cruelly punished; so that what her severity could not prevent, yet her severity did punish; for Diana's practice was not to watch her wanton Nymphs, nor to hunt out their evil haunts, or lurking-places, to see their evil actions, but her practice was to hunt the more modest and temperate creatures, which were the beasts of the Fields and Forests: So, like as Diana, I shall not watch my Maids, nor pardon their rude or dishonourable actions.
Pray Madam try this Maid, for she is very honourably born, and well bred, but poor.
I shall not refuse her for poverty: But as I will have some bound for the truth and trust of my vulgar servants, so I will have some bound for the behaviour, virtue, and modesty of my honourable servants, or else I will not take them.
Monsieur Frisk, you are well met, for I was even now sending a Footman for you.
For what, good Mother Matron?
Marry to come to a company of young Ladies, who do half long for you.
They shall not lose their longing, if I can help them.
Now by my Troth, and that is spoke like a Gentleman; but let me tell you, there is a great many of them.
Why then there is the more choice.
But there is no choosing amongst Ladies, you must take better for worse.
There is no worst amongst Ladies, they are all fair and good.
In faith I perceive now why the Ladies desire your company so much as they do.
Why my dear Mother Matron?
Because you speak well of them behind their backs, and pro∣mise them much to their faces; and I will assure you, they have as pro∣mising
faces as you can promise them; but great Promisers are not good.
Will you say the Ladies faces are not good?
I say men's promises are not good. But you are very quick with me, Monsieur Frisk, to take me upon the hip so suddenly; but, beshrew me, your sudden frisking Answer hath put me into a Passion, which hath percur∣bed the sense of my Discourse. Lord, Lord, what power a villainous word hath over the passions!
If you please, Mother Matron, a kiss shall ask pardon for your vile∣lanous word.
And now, by my troth, I have not been kissed by a young Gentle∣man above this twenty years; but now I am in haste, and cannot stay to re∣ceive your gift, wherefore I will refer it until another time.
But I may forget to give it.
Never fear that, for I shall remember you of it, when time shall serve: But come away, for the Ladies will be horrible angry I have stayed so long, for they were all going to dance, for the Fiddles were tuned, Tables and Stools removed, room made, and they in a dancing posture, only they stay for you to Frisk them about.
Madam, you behaved your self more familiar to day, than your Ladyship was wont to do.
It is true, because those I conversed with to day were but inferior persons, and I speak more familiar to such persons as are below my quality, than those that are equal to me, to do them grace and favour; and if they take it not so, I can only say my Civility was ignorantly placed on foolish and ignorant persons.
Some say Poems are not good, unless they be gloriously At∣tired.
What do they mean by glorious Attire?
Rhetoric.
Why gay words are not Wit, no more than a fair Face is a good Soul; and it is Wit which makes Poems good, not words.
Indeed Rhetoric is no part of the Body of Wit, no more than of the Soul, only it is the outward garment, which is Taylors work.
Then it seems, as if the Grammarians, Logicians, and The∣toricians, are the Taylors for Oratory, who cut shapes, sit places, seam and
few words together to make several Eloquent Garments, or Garments of E∣loquence, as Orations, Declarations, Expressions, and the like worditive work, as they please, or at least according to the fashion.
They are so.
Why then those that say Verse is not good, unless gloriously At∣tired, do as much as to say a man is a fool that hath not a fine Suit of Clothes on, or, that a Curled Hair, sweetly powdered, is a wise, or witty Brain, powdered with Fancies. This surely is an unpardonable mistake, or rather an incurable madness, for there is neither Sense nor Reason in it.
It is not so much a madness, nor that we call Natural Fools, but Amorous Fools, or Finical Fools, or such as are Opinionated Fools, or Self-conceited Fools, or High-bound Fools.
High-bound Fools? What doe you mean by High-bound Fools?
Strong-lin'd Fools.
Those are Learned Fools.
No, they are Conceited Fools; for their strength of Wit lies in a Conceit.
Those, for the most part, their Wit is buried in Oblivion.
If there be any Wit to bury.
Who is so foolish to bury Wit?
You, in the rubbish of words.
The only Grave to Wit is a foolish Ear.
Let me tell you, Ladies, that Wit is so far from lying in a Grave, as it hardly settles any where; for it is so Agile, and flies so swiftly, and yet extends in breadth so far, as it spreads the wings of Fancy, not only over all the World, and every particular thing in the World, but one In∣finite and Eternal Nature, and with the Bill of Conception picks a hole, whereby the Eyes of Imagination spy out the dark Dungeons of Pluto, and the glorious Mansions of Jove.
Then Poems need not the garments of Rhetoric.
No more than a Fair Lady: And as for my part, I like Po∣ems as I like a Woman, best uncloathed, for then I am sure they cannot de∣ceive or delude me with false and feigned Shows.
Madam, will you please to go abroad, and take the cool re∣freshing Air to day?
Yes, Temperance, if you will; but I had rather stay and entertain Monsieur Serious Contemplations company.
Indeed Madam I will forbid his frequent Visits; for other∣wise you will bury your self in his melancholy Conversation.
Pray do not, for he is the greatest delight in life.
And then he brings such a numerous Train of Fancies and O∣pinions, as fills up your Head, which is the largest room in your bodily house; insomuch, as none of your domestic Thoughts, which are the Minds usefullest servants, can stir about your lifes ordinary affairs.
Why Temperance, Fancies are pretty youths, which make harm∣less and innocent sport, to pass the time away.
We have so little time, as we shall not need to pass it idly away.
As much as we complain of want of time, we have more than we can tell well how to spend.
Then pray forbid Monsieur Serious Contemplation not to bring his wilde, stubborn, and useless Opinions; for they make more disorder, and louder noise, and greater Factions, than if all the Dogs and Bears in the Town were set together by the ears, and more mischief comes thereby, than I can rectify.
Now Liberty, you are a Fore-runner of Visitants.
Yes Madam, for there are the five Sistres, the five Senses, come to visit you.
They are the troublesomest Visitants that are; they are so extra∣vagant, so impertinent, so various, and so humoursome, as I know not how to entertain them: But pray Liberty usher them into the Gallery where my pi∣ctures hang, drawn by the Rarest and most Famous Masters; and let the Room be sweetly perfumed, and bring a Banquet of the most delicious and choicest Drinks and Meats, and let there be sine linen Napkins, and spread all the Floor over with downy Carpets, and set soft Cushions on the Couch∣es, and whilst they are there, let the Music sound harmoniously, with soft strokes, pleasing notes, and gentle strains: And Temperance, I desire you to Order the rest of the Entertainment, and let Ease wait upon you: As for you, Wanton and Surfeit, I forbid you, as not to come into their Com∣pany.
Always when my Lady makes a great Entertainment, we are forbid to appear.
Although my Lady forbids me, yet the Company never leaves un∣till they have found me out, so that I am still at the end of the Entertainment, like an Epilogue to a Play.
And I sometimes come in like a Chorus.
O that I might have my wish!
What would you wish?
I would wish to be the only Beauty.
And if I might have my wish, I would wish to conquer all the World, and then to divide it to the Meritorious, and not to rule it my self: for I desire not the Power, but the Fame.
And if I might have my wish, I would wish to be the Su∣premised Wit in Nature.
You three are sympathetical in Ambition; for one desires to in∣captive all Hearts with her Beauty; the other desires to conquer all the World with his Valour; the third desires to confute all Mankind with her Wit.
And what do you wish, Mademoiselle Ambition?
I wish I were Destiny, to link you all three together.
Come leave your wishing, and let us go to see the Monster that is to be seen.
The most mostrous Creature I imagine, is a headless Maid.
What is that, a devirginated Maid?
Yes.
When she is devirginated, she is no Maid.
O yes; for as a Wife is one that is married, a Widow one that hath been married, so a Maid is one that was never married, and a Virgin is one that never knew man, and a headless Maid is one that hath lost her Fire∣ginity, and yet was never married.
If a devirginated Maid be a headless Monster, in the World there are many headless Monsters.
But the best of it is, Lady, their Monstrosity is invisible.
You say true; but they are not monstrous in Nature, but in Vice, for they are transformed by their Crimes.
So are Drunkards.
They are so; for all Courtesans and Drunkards are beasts: For though a Drunkard is not a headless beast, yet he is a brainless beast.
But what Monster is that you would have us to see?
Why a woman with a Hogs face.
Then it is likely she hath a Sows disposition. But howsoever let us go.
One witty word, or saying from a fool, is, for the most part remembered, and often repeated, when from a Wit it would be hardly taken notice of.
There is reason for that: for wit is more remarkable from fools, than those that have natural wits.
Monsieur Satirical, I am come with a Message from a company of fair young Ladies; the Message is this: They desire that you would do them the favour to come to them, to judge of a Poem which they have made amongst themselves.
Women make Poems? burn them, burn them; let them make bone-lace, let them make bone-lace.
You are an unjust Judge, to condemn their Poems to the fire, before you have examined them.
The best trial of a Ladies wit is the fire; besides, the fire will supply that want of Poetical heat which should make Poems, which heat women's brains cannot suffer.
You are mistaken Sir, and mis-inform'd: for we women have as hot brains as any of the Masculine Sex of you all have.
I grant your Sex have an unnatural heat, which makes them all mad.
I think the Ladies were mad when they sent me for you.
No doubt of it, and you are mad for coming.
Your words will make me mad before I go away, although I came well-temper'd hither: beshrew me my very bones do quiver in my flesh to hear you.
If thy bones quiver so much as to shake, they will soon powder into dust: for Age hath almost dissolved thee into ashes already, and Time hath eaten off thy flesh, as Crows do carrion.
Out upon thee Satyr, a beastly man you are by my Troth, and so I will deliver you to the Ladies.
You shall not deliver me to the Ladies, I will deliver my self to Death first.
Thou art so bad, Death will refuse thee: but I will do your Er∣rand I'll warrant you, I'll set a mark upon you that shall disgrace you.
Thou can not set a fouler mark than thy self upon me, there∣fore come not near me.
Worse and worse, worse and worse. O that I were so young and fair, as my Beauty might get me a Champion to revenge my quarrel! But I will go back to the Ladies, they are fair and young enough, as being in the Spring of Beauty, although I am in my Autumnal years.
Thou art in the midst of the Winter of thine Age, and the Snow of Time is fallen on thy head, and lies upon thy hair.
They that will not live until they are old, the Proverb says, They must be hanged when they are young, and I hope it is your Destiny.
I am come to tell you, Wanton and Surset, that my Lady is gone to receive the Visit of Monsieur Tranquillities Peace, who is come to see her, and old Matron Temperance is gone to wait upon her; wherefore you may go, for there is none left with the five Senses but Excess.
I wonder Mother Matron should stay so long.
I cannot guess at the reason.
She might have delivered her Message twice in this time.
Mother Matron, Welcome, welcome, welcome: What News? what News?
What says Monsieur Satirical?
Will he come?
Or will he not come? pray speak.
Are you dumb, Mother Matron?
Pray Ladies give me some time to temper my passion; for if a house be set on fire, there is required sometime to quench it.
But some fires cannot be quenched.
Indeed my fire of Anger is something of the nature of the un∣quenchable fire of Hell, which endeavours to afflict the Soul, as well as to torment the Body.
Jove bless us, Mother Matron! Are you inflamed with Hell∣fire?
How should I be otherwise, when I have been tormented with a Devil?
Jupiter keep us! What have you done, and with whom have you been?
Marry I have been with a cloven-tongu'd Satyr, who is worse, far worse, than a cloven-footed Devil.
Is all this rage against Monsieur Satirical?
Yes marry is it, and all too little, by reason it cannot hurt him.
How hath he offended you?
As he hath offended you all, railed against you, most horribly railed against you: He says you are all mad, and hath condemned your Po∣ems to the fire, and your employment to the making of bone-lace.
Why these sayings of his do not offend me.
Nor me.
Nor me.
Nor me.
But if he had said you had been old, and ill-favour'd, carrion for Crows, dust and ashes for the grave, as he said to me, then you would have been as angry as I.
No truly, I should have only laughed at it.
By your favour, I should have been as angry as Mother Matron, if I had been as old as she; so I should have been concerned in the behalf of my Age.
Marry come up, are you turned Lady Satirical, to upbraid me with my Age? Is this my reward for my jaunting and trotting up and down with your idle Message to more idle persons, men that are mere Jack∣straws, flouting companions, railing detractors, such as are good for nothing but to put people together by the cars?
By the Effects it proves so, for you and I are very near falling out: But I thought you would have given me thanks for what I said, as taking your part, and not inveterates your spleen.
Can you expect I should give you thanks for calling me old? Can the report of Age be acceptable to the Effeminate Sex? But Lady, let me tell you, if you live you will be as old as I, and yet desire to be thought young: For although you were threescore, yet you would be very angry, nay in a furious rage, and take those to be your mortal Enemies that should reckon you to be above one and twenty, for you will think your self as beau∣tiful as one of fifteen.
I do not think so, although I believe our Sex have good opinions of themselves, even to the last gasp; yet not so partial, as to imagine themselves as one of fifteen at threescore.
It is proved by all Experience, that all Mankind is self-conceited, especially the Effeminate Sex; and self-conceit doth cast a fair shadow on a foul face, and fills up the wrinkles of Time with the paint of Imagine∣tion.
But the Eyes must be blind with Age, or else they would see the wrinkles Time hath made, in the despite of the paint of Imagination.
By your favour, Self-conceit doth cause the Eyes of Sense to be like false glasses, that cast a youthful gloss, and a fair light, on a withered skin: For though the deep lines in the face cannot be smoothed, yet the lines, or species, in, or of the sight, may be drawn by self-conceit so small as not to be perceived: And were it not for the Eyes of Self-conceit, and the Paint of Imagination, as Mother Matron says, which preserves a good Open∣neon
of our selves, even to the time of our Death, wherein all remembrance is buried, we should grow mad, as we grow old, for the loss of our Youth and Beauty.
I by my faith you would grow mad, did not Conceit keep you in your right wits.
The truth is, our Sex grow melancholy, when our Beauty de∣cayes.
I grow melancholy at the talking of it.
Let us speak of some other subject that is more pleasing than Age, Ruin, and Death.
Let us talk of Monsieur Satirical again.
He is a worse subject to talk of than Death.
As bad as he is, you shall carry another Message to him.
I will sooner carry a Message to Pluto; for in my Conscience he will use me more civilly, and will send you a more respectful Answer than Monsieur Satirical.
Indeed I have heard that the Devil would flatter; but I never heard that a Satirical Poet would flatter.
But a Satirical Poet will lye, and so will the Devil; and there∣fore talk no more of them, but leave them together.
O Temperance, I am discredited for ever, the Ladies the Senses are all sick: What shall I do?
You must send for some Doctors.
What Doctors shall I send for?
Why Old Father Time, he hath practised long, and hath great Experience; then there is Rest and Sleep, two very good &amp; safe Doctors.
Send Ease presently to fetch them, bid her make haste.
Temperance, are the Doctors come?
Yes, and gone again.
And what have they prescribed?
Abstinence.
And will that cure them?
They say it will prove a perfect cure: Probatum est.
The next act I do, shall be to turn away Wanton, Idle, Excess, and Surfeit.
You will hardly get them out of your Service, although you should beat them out.
Madam, me thinks Monsieur Vain-glorious is a very pro∣per man, and would be a fit Match for your Ladyship.
Let me tell you, I will never marry a man whose Soul hath Va∣cuum; but that man I would marry, should have a soul filled with Natures best Extractions; his Head the Cabinet of Natures wisest Counsels, and cu∣riousest Fancies; his Heart the Treasury of Natures purest, currentest, and Heroic Virtue: For if ever I marry, I will have a Husband that is able to govern Kingdoms, to Marshal Armies, to Fight Battles, and Conquer Nati∣once; and not a self-conceited Fool, or fantastical Gallant, such as speaks ta•∣ing Words, wears slanting Clothes, walks with a proud Garb, looks with a disdainful Countenance, Courts Mistresses, loves Flatteries, hates Superiors, and scorns Inferiors, keeps a greater Retinue than his Revenue will maintain, who like moths, eat through the cloth of his Estate, and he like another ••, plays so long in his Vain-glorious Flame, until he is consumed therein, span∣ding with an open purse, and prodigal vanity, and yet receives with a cove∣tous hand: So Vanity flies and flutters about in the heat of Prosperity, and dies in the Winter of Adversity. No, I will have a Husband, if ever I have any, whose Mind is settled like the Centre, which can neither rise nor fall with good or bad Fortune; and not a little Soul in a narrow Heart, and wit∣less Brain.
Sir, I desire you will pardon me; but I am commanded to bring you here a Challenge.
Are you the Second, Sir?
No Sir.
Are you a Pimp, Sir?
I scorn your base words, for I am a Gentleman.
Many a Gentleman scorns base words, but not base Actions.
I scorn both base words, and base Actions.
It doth not seem so by the Challenge you have brought.
Why, what is the Challenge?
The Challenge is from a Woman, and I will read it to you.
I Challenge you, and am resolved to fight,
Not in the Field of Mars, as Champion Knight,
Nor in the Court of Venus will I be,
But to the Lists of Mercury Challenge thee:
Where all the Muses will Spectators sit,
To Judge which is the greatest Victor of Wit.
The Weapons which we fight with must be Words,
For I a woman am, not used to Swords:
Custom and Education leaves us bare
To Natures Arms, the Arms of Death we fear.
These two last Lines make you a Pimp, Sir.
I must be contended, for there is no Revenge to be taken against Ladies: But Mother Matron had been a more properer Messenger than I for this Challenge.
I shall send my Answer by a more inferior person than you are, and so shall take my leave for this time.
Your Servant.
All Poets and Musicians are mad, more or less: for Madness is caused by a distemper of the Brain, like as the Pulse, which beats quicker than the natural motion.
You mistake madness; for madness is not caused by the quickness of motion, but by the irregularity of the motion: And as for Poe∣tical and Musical Motions, although they are quick, yet they keep Time, Time and Order, when those Motions that cause madness do not: But the quick-moving brains of Poets are caused by their lively &amp; elevated Spirits, which are Active and Industrious, always creating for delight or profit, as Verses, Fan∣cies, Scenes, Sonnets, or inventing Arts: And if you account these Ingenious and Divine Spirits to be mad, I shall desire to be mad too, as they are.
But some Spirits are so quick, that they out run all Invention.
Those are neither the spirits of Poets nor Musicians; not but that Poets and Musicians may be mad as other men, but their madness is not
caused by the Poetical and Harmonical spirits, but some other defects of the brain, or distemper of the spirits; but there are many mad, that are so far from Poetical Fancies, or Musical skill, or Inventions, as they can neither conceive the one, or learn the other, or understand either; but Music and Poetry have oft-times cured madness, and certainly are the best and most ex∣cellent Physicians for that disease: For though madness is but one and the same disease, as madness, yet the Causes and Effects are divers.
A Fever in the Brain causes madness.
It rather causes madness to have outragion: Effects; but a cold brain may be mad: But it is neither heat nor cold that causes mad∣nos, but the irregularity of the Spirits.
But heat and cold may cause the irregularity of the Spirits: for as cold Livers make the Veins like standing ponds, which putrefies the blood for want of motion; so very cold Brains may be like Snow or Ice, to obstruct or bind the Spirits, hindering the regular motions.
You say right, and that is a stupid madness: And as a hot Liver may boil and inflame the blood, so hot Brains may inflame the Spy∣ritz, causing Combustious Motions, as Thundering, which is a raging mad∣ness.
Who is raging-mad?
A despairing Lover.
Hang him in his Mistress Frowns, or strangle him in the Cords of her Cruelty.
Would you be served so?
Yes, when I am a mad Lover: For I had rather die than be in love with a hard-hearted Mistress; for of the two I had rather embrace death than Court her, in which Courtship I should be Transformed, or Metamor∣phos'd into many several things: As I should be a River of Lovers Tears, a Ventidock of Lovers Sighs, an Aqueduct of Lovers Griefs, and a Chilling grotto of Lovers Fears; and rather than I would endure these Transformati∣once, I would be well contended to be annihilated.
O fie, had you rather be nothing than a Lover?
I had rather be nothing, than a thing worse than nothing.
Well, I hope to see you a desperate Lover at one time or o∣there.
I hope not, for I have no cause to fear: for my Mind cannot be persuaded by my Fancy, or forced by my Appetites, nor betrayed by my Senses; for Reason governs my Brain, Temperance rules my Appetites, Prudence guards my Senses, and Fortitude keeps the possession and Fort of my Heart.
Love will unthrone Reason, corrupt Temperance, bribe Prudence, and bear Fortitude out of the Fort of your Heart.
For fear of that I will leave you, Ladies.
News; News, Monsieur Satirical hath vouchsafed to return you an Answer to your Challenge.
Who brought it?
A scrubbed fellow in a thred-bare cloak, the rest of the Ladies say. Read it, read it, Mademoiselle Bon' Esprit.
Lady, you Challenged me in Arms to fight,
Appoint the place, the best time is at night
For Natural Duellers; yet I submit,
And shall obey to what hour you think fit:
I am content my Health for to engage,
And venture Life to satisfy your rage.
I am no Coward, I am not afraid
To fight a Duel with a young fair Maid,
Although old Mother Matron she should be
Your Second, for the Judge what she doth see.
He makes me the scurvy burden of his more scurvy Verse, and scurrilous Answer: But I hope this Answer of his to your Challenge, will inveterate your spleen as much as his upbraiding my Age did mine.
I have not such reason to be so concerned as you are; for I am honest, though you are old.
May the Infamy of Vice wither the Blossoms of Youth, as Age doth the Flowers of Beauty, that there may be an equal return of Re∣proach.
Indeed there is some Reciprocalness in Vice and Age.
No, Vice and Youth are Reciprocal.
But I see no Reciprocalnesse betwixt Love and Monsieur Sa∣tyrical.
I make no doubt but to bring Monsieur Satirical into Cupid's snare.
You may sooner bring your self into Vulcan's Net.
Well, mark the end and success.
Nay, rather we shall mark the endless folly.
Lady Pleasure, you are the sweetest young Lady in the World, and the only delight in life.
O Sir, you give a Wooers sentence, and self-love hath bribed your Judgment: for most speak partially, according to their Affections, and not according to Truth.
Truth is a prating, preaching, tattling, twatling Gossip, and tells many times that which would be better concealed.
Truth is the Eye of Knowledge, which brings men out of Igno∣rance: It is the Scale of Justice, the Sword of Execution, the Reward of Me∣rit: It is the Bond of Propriety, and the Seal of Honesty.
Truth is a Tyrant, condemning more than she saves.
She condemns none but Fools, Knaves, Cowards, Irreligious, Licentious, and Vain-glorious persons, to be unworthy, base, false, and wicked.
She condemns Pleasure; for truly there is no such thing as Pleasure.
I must marry, or bury succession in my Grave; but it's dange∣rous, very dangerous. O Nature, Nature, had thou no other way to Create a man, unless thou made a woman! But if thou were forced by the Fates to make that Sex, yet thou had liberty to make her of a constant Mind; but thou art inconstant thy self, as being of female kind: But since I must marry, Discretion shall make the Choice, which will choose Virtue before Wealth, Wit before Beauty, Breeding before Birth; if she hath Virtue, she will be Chaste; if she hath Wit, she will be Conversable, if she hath good Breeding, she will be modest and well-behav'd. But where is that woman that is virtuously Chaste, wittily Conversable, and Modestly-behav'd? If any woman be thus, as I would have her, it is Mademoiselle Bon' Esprit, she seems to have a Noble Soul by her Honourable Actions, which women, for the most part, are so far from, as they seem, for the most part, to have no souls at all, by their mean and petty actions: Also she hath a Supernatural Wit, I mean supernatural, as being a woman; and her Wit is not only Ingenious, but Judicious, by which she will set a value on subjects of Merit and Worth, and despise those that are base; when fools know not how to prize the best, but choose that is bad, not knowing what is good, so walk in Errors ways, which leads unto dishonour; but she, having Wit and Honour, knows the benefit of Honesty so well, as she will be Chaste for her own sake, were it not for her Husbands. But I most satirically have tran∣slated her sweet and harmless mirth, which was presented in her Elevated Verse into a wanton Interpretation. Diana, thou Goddess of Chastity, par∣don me! But stay thoughts, whither wander you? let me examine you be∣fore you pass any farther, as whether or no you are not led by the bow-string of Cupped, or the girdle of Venus, into the foul paths of vain desires, and del•∣ding beauty, to the labyrinth of destruction, there to be kept and incaptivated by the entanglements and subtle windings, and turnings, and various passa∣ges of Amorous Love? But a strict Examination requires Time, and a just
Judge decides not a Cause without Debate; therefore I will have another Contemplation of Consideration, before I address my Suit, or make known my Desires.
Madam, why should you refuse me?
Because I cannot love.
Not love me? why I am Valiant, Wise, Witty, Honest, Ge∣nerous, and Handsome: And where will you find a man where all these Ex∣cellencies do meet in one?
Now you have bragged of your self, I will plainly prove to you, that you are neither perfectly Valiant, nor Wise, nor Witty, nor Generous, nor truly Honest.
You cannot.
I can: And first for Valour. Have you gone to the Wars, and fought? why, millions do the like, and a poor Common Soldier will venture for sixpence on that which a vain Cavalier will hardly do to gain an immortal Fame: Or peradventure you have fought Duels, why every Drun∣kard will do as much, who in their drink they not reason to consider Valour, which is only to fight for the sake of Honour; but most commonly Duels are fought through Anger, or Fear, or Scorn, or Revenge, or the like, which is not true valour, but they fight rather like beasts than men, as with Force, Few∣rye, or Appetite, caused by natural Antipathies, or through the heat of the blood, or desires or dislikes of the Senses: whereas true Valour is just, tem∣pirate, patient, prudent, and is the Heroic part, or Virtue of the Soul: And to be valiant, is to fight for the right of Truth, and the defence of Inno∣cency, without Partiality, Covetousness, or Ambition: Also to prove your self Valiant, have you received misfortunes with patience, and suffered tor∣mints with fortitude? Have you forgiven your Enemies, or spared a blue∣die Execution for humanities sake, or released rich prisoners without Ran∣some, and poor without slavery? Have you heard your self slandered with Patience, justified your wrongs with Temperance, fought your Enemies without Anger, maintained your Honour without Vain-glory, then you are Valiant.
And for Wisdom, what do you call Wisdom? to speak Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, and not understand them? or to understand them, and cannot speak them? Or to cite dead Authors? Or to repeat their Learned Opinions? Or to make Sophisterian Disputes? Or to speak Latin Senten∣ces? Or to tell stories out of Histories? Or to write several Hands? Or to spell with true Orthography? Or to talk of the Sciences, but study none? Or to talk of Morality, but practice none? This you may call Learned, but not Wisdom. But to be Wise, Have you settled a Kingdom in peace, and put it in order, when it was imbrovled with Civil Wars, or ensnared with confused and entangled Laws? Or have you appeased a mutinous and half-starv'd Army? Have you led an Army with Order, pitched a Field with Art,
fought a Battle with Prudence, or have made a safe and honourable Retreat? Or have you been so provident, as to relieve Famine with fore-stor'd prove∣sions? Or to prevent misfortunes with fore-sight? Or have you distinguish∣ed a Cause clearly, or given an upright Judgment? Or have you delivered judicious Counsel, and given seasonable and suitable Admonitions? Have you composed a Common-wealth, or made profitable Laws to uphold a Com∣mon-wealth? Have you defended a Common-wealth from Enemies, or purged a Common-wealth from Factions? Have you made Officers worthy of Employments, Magistrates able to Govern, Soldiers skilful to Com∣mand? Have you sitly matched men and business, and offices with men? Have you employed the idle, and given light to the ignorant? Have you dis∣charged a Common-wealth of Superfluity, or superfluous Commodities, and brought in those which are more useful, such as they have wanted? Have you Manured a barren Country, or enriched a poor Kingdom? Have you made honest Associates, faithful Agreements, and safe Traffiques? Then you may think your self Wise, and be silent; for the Actions will proclaim it.
Also what do you call Wit? Imitating Extravagances like a Jackanapes, or a Buffoon, to extort the Countenance with making wry faces? Or with much laughter to show the teeth, which perchance are all rotten in the head? Or foolishly to divulge the infirmities of particular persons in an open As∣sembly? Or putting Innocence or Youth out of Countenance? Or to di∣sturb the Serious with idle Sports? Or disorder the Wise with foolish and rude Jests? Or do you all Wit affected Dresses, affected Garbs, affected Countenances, or vain-straind Complements, or useless Words, or senseless Speeches, or cross Answers, or impertinent Questions? But for your Wit, Hath your Fame flown beyond Euripides, Homer, or Ovid, your Descrip∣tions beyond Horace, or your Verse beyond Virgil? Have you Oratory to e∣qual the Orators of Athens, Lacedaemonians, or Rome? or have you devised any Ingenious Inventions, or produced any profitable Arts, or found out any new Sciences? Then you are Witty.
Likewise what do you call Honesty? to live luxuriously to your self, not meddling, nor intermingling your self and home-Affairs with the public Af∣fairs of the World? To keep open House at Christmas? To give your scraps to the poor? To pay Wages duly, Debts justly, Taxes quietly? To kiss your Maids privately? And although all this is good and commendable, but the kissing of your Maids, yet it is not enough to make a perfect honest man: But to be perfectly honest, Have you tempered your unfatiable Appetite with Abstinence, moderated your violated passions with Reason, governed your unruly actions with Prudence? Have you not exacted unjustly, judged par∣tially, accused falsely, betrayed treacherously, kept wrongfully, took forcibly? but have you advanced Virtues, defended the Innocent? Have you witnessed for Truth, pleaded for Right, and stood for the defenceless? Then you are perfectly Honest.
Also what do you call Generosity? To give a present to a lewd Mistress? To bribe a corrupted Judge? Or fee a subtle Lawyer? Or feast the vain Courtiers? Or maintain Sycophants and Flatterers? Or Bail a just Arrest? Or to be bound for the Deboist? Or to give Ladies Collations? Or to lend or give idle drunken fellows money? Or to give when you think to hear of it again? This is Prodigality, not Generosity. But to be Generous, Have you set your prisoner free, Ransomed the Captives, or bought off the chains
of the Gally-slaves? Have you maintained young Orphans, or helped poor Widows? Have you cheered the Aged, nourished the Hungry, succoured the Infirm, relieved the Distressed, comforted the Sorrowful, and guided the Ignorant? Or have you upheld an Ancient Family from sinking? Then you are Generous.
As for your Person, the more Handsome and Beautiful you are, the more Effeminate you seem. But to conclude, That man that hath a narrow Heart, and a mean Soul, that only seeks his own delights, which all vain-glorious persons do, I will not marry: For Noble Ambition hath a heart, whose veins with bounty flow, and wears her life only for Honours use and Fire∣tues need.
There is no behaviour so inconvenient, or so unfitting a wo∣man, especially a young beautiful Lady, as to be familiar: for that gives way and liberty for men to be rude and uncivil.
Why how would you have a young Lady to behave her self?
Modestly, reservedly, and civilly, which behaviour will keep men in order, and at a distance.
To seem very modest, is to appear simple; to be much reserved, is to be formal, which is only fit for State-Ladies; to be very civil, is to be too humble, and appears mean, and only fit for Country wives.
No Lady, for those that give no respect, will receive none; but those that are civil to others, others will be civil to them: for they will be ashamed to be rude to those that are civil: And as for Gravity, it puts Boldness out of countenance, and Modesty quenches unlawful desires, con∣verting the beholders to Purity, Love, and Esteem.
There is no behaviour like to the French Mode, to be careless and free, to discourse in Raillery.
To be careless, is to be rude; to be free, is to be wanton; to raillery, is to reproach under the protection of wit, it is a reproachful Wit, and a wit of Reproach.
All wit is commendable.
No Lady, a Jesters wit is not fit for a grave Judge, or a great Prince, he may keep a Fool, or make a Fool to make him merry, and to laugh at their Jests and Gestures, but not to be a Buffoon or Jester him∣self.
Let me advise and counsel you, Temperance, which is, to con∣damn
no kind of Wit, but especially a Mode-Wit, lest you should be ac∣counted a foolish Judge.
Let me tell you, they will be the greatest Fools that judge the Judge.
I am resolved, yet being a Criminal, how to address my Suit, I am in doubt: To ask pardon for my faults, were to make my faults seem greater than they are; to excuse them, were to make my judgment seem weaker than I think it is; to justify them, were to condemn her. Well, I will neither ask pardon, nor make excuse, nor yet justify them; but in plain language declare my pure Affections, honest Desires, and honourable Re∣quests; if she believes the first, approves the third, and consents to the se∣cond, I hope to be happy, if not, I must be content: for it is a folly to mourn, when it brings no remedy.
The Lady Variety, now she is a Widow, she tricks and dresses up her self in her Mourning, and is more fond of the company of men, than we that are Maids.
It is a sign she knows by Experience that the Masculine Sex are better, and more pleasurable company than any of her own Sex, which Maids do not know, by reason they are for the most part restrained.
Why should you find fault with Widows, when married Wives endeavour by all the Arts they can to get the company of men, and do strive by enticements to allure them to Courtships, as much as Widows or Maids to lawful and honest Marriage?
One would think that married women, by their neglect and dis∣respect to their Husbands, they loved not the company of men.
They may love the company of men, though not the company of one man, as their Husbands.
Come, come, Ladies, Maids are always spiteful to Married Women, because they be preferred in Marriage before them, and are jealous of Widows, for fear that they should get their Servants and Suitors from them.
I should sooner be jealous of a Widow, than spiteful to a Ma∣ried Wife: for most Wives are in a condition to be pitied rather than en∣vied;
but Widows have such a magnetic power, as one Widow will draw away the Servants and Suitors from a dozen Maids.
Indeed Widows are very prevalent; for a poor widow shall have more Suitors, and better Choice, than a rich Maid, and an ill-favour'd Widow, than a handsome Maid, an old Widow, than a young Virgin.
I wonder at it.
Why should you wonder at it? since they know the humours, weaknesses, and strengths of men, better than Maids do, by which they know how to work and draw them to their bent and design.
No, that's not the Cause.
What's the Cause then?
Why men think VVidows wiser than Maids, as being more known and experienced.
Indeed they have more knowledge than Maids, or else they have very ill luck.
Why, Maids are more desirous to marry VVidowers than Bachelors.
What is the reason of that?
I know not, except it be the former reason.
No, no, it is because it is said that VVidowers love their second wives better than the first.
And what their third wife?
I suppose Love increases with the number.
But women, it is said, love their first husband better than the second.
That's only an excuse to marry a third, and so a fourth Hus∣band.
Indeed Death and Hymen are great friends to VVidows and VVidowers: for if once a woman buries her husband, or a man his wife, they never leave marrying and burying, until they have had five or six husband and wives.
If it were always so, I would I had been married, and had buri∣ed my husband; O what a Gossipping life should I have had! Gossipping at my husbands Funerals, and Gossipping at my Married Nuptials, besides the pleasure of being wooed.
But you would have more trouble and vexation in the time between your Mariage-day and your Husbands Death, than pleasure betwixt your Husbands Death and Mariage-day.
O no: for I suppose if Death be a friend, he will take away e∣very Husband as soon as that time is past they call Hony-moneth.
Ladies, I will tell you News.
What News?
The young Widow, the Lady Variety, hath the Small Pox.
That's no News; for all sorts of Diseases are too frequent to be News; If they were, it would be happy for all animal creatures, if dis∣eases were strangers.
But it is News that she should have them.
It is in respect of a new face, or otherwise not: for all mankind
in these parts of the World have that disease at one time or other, if they live to it.
Truly I pity her.
I hope she is not in such a condition to be pitied: for pity is a kin to scorn, as near as Cousin-germans, for reproach and shame are brother and sister, and scorn is the son of reproach, and pity is the daughter of shame: But although the Small Pox may set marks of deformity, they set none of dishonour; they only mark the Body, not the Soul; and that is only to be accounted shame, and to be ashamed of, as the infirmities of the Soul, for which they may be pitied.
That deserves scorn.
Baseness only deserves scorn, and not infirmities, loss, or mis∣fortunes; but there is a difference betwixt infirmities, loss, misfortunes, baseness, and wickedness. Infirmities proceed directly from Nature, Loss from Possession, Misfortunes from Interpositions, Baseness from that creature called Man, and Wickedness from Devils: The first is caused by the care∣lesness of Nature, the second by the lack of Power, the third by the no∣cessity of Fate, the fourth by the corruption of Man, the last by the per∣swasion and temptation of the Devil. The first, second, and third are not to be avoided, the fourth not to be practised, the fifth not to be followed nor fostered. The first is to be pitied, the second to be grieved for, the third to be lamented for, the fourth to be scorned, and the fifth to be hated and ab∣horrid. Thus we may grieve for the loss of her Beauty, but not pity her, having no natural defect in the Soul, which is the Understanding, and the Rational part.
But Sickness is a natural defect.
No, Sickness is no more a natural defect, than Time, or Death, Life, or Growth: for they are only Natural Effects, but not Natural De∣fects.
Pray turn us not out of your Service for one fault.
Why you are the ground wherein all Mischief is sown, and whereon all Vice grows; besides, you are the only Bawds for Adul∣tery.
No indeed, the chief Bawds to Adultery, are public Meetings of all kinds, either Divine, Customary, Triumphant, or Recreative: Also Bravery, whether Ceremonious Gallantry, or Magnificence: Likewise Beauty, Wit, Diligence, Observance, and rich Presents: besides Jealousy and Covetousness.
No, Wanton, it is your glancing Eyes, simpering Countenance, and toyish Tricks.
Truly Madam, Idle and I are fitter to make Wenches than Bawds,
it is your Ladyship that is the Lady of Pleasure, which persuades more to Adultery than we poor harmless creatures.
Go get you out of my house, for I will not keep such bold rude Wenches as you are.
Pray Madam pardon them for this time.
How shall we pass our time to day?
For us men we cannot pass our time better, or more pleasanter, than in the company of fair young Ladies.
To avoid tedious Complements and Discourses to particular cars, or the confusion of many Tongues speaking at once, let us sit and dis∣course in Dialogues.
Agreed; but shall we discourse in Rhyme or in Prose?
In Rhymes by any means: for Rhymes many times hide and obe∣scure that Nonsense that would be discovered in Prose.
Then it seems Rhyme is a Veil to cover the face of Nonsense.
They are so: for one can never discover an ill Poem, until the Rhymes be dissolved into Prose, which shows whether there be Sense, Reason, Wit, or Fancy in them.
But to be turned into Prose, the Poems will lose the Elegance of the Style, and the Eloquence of the Language.
Why, if a man should lose his Hat and Feather, and be stripped of a fine and gay Suit of Clothes, he would neither have the less brain nor blood, nor soul, nor body, beauty nor shape; and though gay and glorious Appa∣rel may allure the Eyes of a young Lady, or a Novice Gentleman, or may draw the ignorant vulgar to Admiration, and so to an Esteem and Respect; yet those that have clear Understandings, solid Judgments, quick Wits, and knowing Wisdoms, will be so far from admiring the man for the sake of his gay Clothes, or esteeming him for his glorious Attire, as they will be apt to condemn him as a vain man.
Then you reject the clothing of Poems in fine Language.
No; but I despise those Poems that have nothing but Language and Rhymes.
Then it is a folly to write in Verse, if Rhymes be not account∣ed of.
Verse is to be accounted of for the sake of Numbers, which is harmonious; yet neither Harmonious Numbers, nor Chiming Rhymes, nor Gay Rhetoric, is Reason, Wit, nor Fancy, which is the Ground, Body, or Soul of a good Poem.
Yet no Poem is esteemed, but condemned, that is not in gay and new-fashion'd clothing.
Then Chasers Poems, which are in plain and old-fashioned
garments, which is Language, is to be despised, and his Wit condemned; but certainly Chasers Witty Poems, and Lively Descriptions, in despig• of their Old Language, as they have lasted in great Esteem and Admiration these three hundred years, so they may do Eternally amongst the Wise•• every Age.
Gentlemen, leave off your Disputes, for the Ladies will be too hard for us: for they are always Conquerors in peace and war, both in the Schools and in the Fields, in the City and in the Court.
Pray leave off this particular Dispute, and let us discourse in ge∣neral.
Agreed.
Begin.
Who shall begin?
I will begin; for a women's Tongue hath privilege and prehe∣minency in the first place.
Old brains are like to barren ground,
Or like a wilderness forlorn,
Or like cracked bells that have no sound,
Or like a child Abortive born:
For Time the fire of Wit puts out,
And sills the brain with vapour cold,
And quenches Fancy without doubt,
For Wit is feeble when it is old.
Wit neither fails, weakens, decays, nor dies,
Though bred and born, as other creatures are,
Only the Brain, the Womb wherein it lies:
But when it is born, Fame nurses it with care,
And to Eternity doth it prefer.
Wit makes the brain sick when it breeding is,
And painful throws before, and at its birth;
But when it is born, if good, a Comfort it is,
The Parent Poetry creates with mirth,
He joys to see his Issue fairly spring,
And hopes with time in numbers may increase,
And being multiplied may honours bring,
As a posterity that never cease.
Wit, the Issue, and Off-spring of the Soul,
From which the Nature sublimely is Divine,
Dimensions hath, and parts, yet in the whole,
United is, of breaches there's no sign.
Wit, like the Soul is, which no body hath,
No latitude, yet hath a perfect form,
Yet flies all several ways, yet keeps a path,
A path of Sense, which never turns therefrom.
But wondrous strange, and monstrous is Wit,
That all contrarieties in it do dwell:
For it all Shapes, Employments, Humours fit,
Like Beasts, Men, Gods, or terrible Devils in Hell.
O fie, O fie, this discourse is like dancing the Hay, or dancing a Scotch Gig, which will put you out of breath strait.
You would have us discourse in the measure of a Spanish Pavin.
No, but the measure of a French Galliard would do very well.
For my part, Lady, I like Gigs best, and therefore, if you please, begin another Gig.
The Spring is dressed in buds and blossoms sweet:
The Summer laughs until her Cheeks look red,
The plenteous Autumn warm under our feet.
The Winter shaking cold, is almost dead.
Go on with the twelve Months.
Fierce furious March comes in with bended brows,
Commanding storms and tempests to arise,
Beating the trees and clouds, as if it meant
To make them subject to his tyrannies.
Then follows April, weeping for her buds,
For fear rude March had all her young destroyed;
But when she thought her tears might rise to floods,
With Sun-beams dried her Eyes, his heat her joyed.
Then wanton May came full of Amorous Sports,
Decking her self with gaudy Colours gay,
And entertaining Lovers of all sorts,
In pleasure she doth pass her time a way.
Then enters June with fair and full fat face,
Her Eyes are bright and clear as the Noon-Sun,
And in her carriage hath a Majestic grace,
In Equinoctial pace she walks, not run.
But Iuly's sultry hot, Ambitious proud,
And in a fiery Chariot she doth ride,
When angry is, she thundering speaks aloud,
Shoots Lightning through the clouds on every side.
Jove bless us! what Designs have you Ladies and Gentlemen that you sit so gravely together in Council.
Our chief Design is Wit.
A witty Design: But really, what are you doing?
They are idly Rhyming.
Hang idle Rhyming, give me Reason.
Although our Rhymes are not good, yet they are not foul, by reason they are made on fair and pure Subjects.
Why, what are the Subjects they are made on?
They are made of the several Seasons and Months of the Year.
By your favour, Lady, there be some of the Seasons and Months very foul.
But we have Rhymed of none but the fair Months as yet.
Then let me advise you to stop your Poetical Vein: for if you go farther, you will meet with foul weather and rain.
Out, out of our company.
Do you come here to rail at our Rhymes, and yet Rhyme your self, and worse than any of the company?
I only Rhyme to make my self Free of the Company, though not of the Wits.
So you will call us fools by and by.
No faith, your Rhymes have named you already, and so pre∣vented me.
Why this is worse and worse.
Let us seek a revenge.
What revenge shall we take?
We will tie him to an Asses head.
No, we will tie him to a Foxes tail.
Ladies tie me to what you please, so you do not tie me to a Horn.
Yes, to Altheas Horn, the Horn of plenty.
It is a sign Althea is a Woman, that she gives her gifts in a Horn; but I had rather starve, than receive plenty in such a thing.
Let us transform him as Action did.
And follow him as his hounds did.
Young Ladies, be not so wilde and fierce, to be the hounds your selves to follow in pursuit.
No, no, we will be as Diana, that transformed him.
Then you must be liable to the same Censure, which is, to be thought cruel.
The more Cruel our Sex is, the more Chaste we are thought to be.
OUr Auth'ress bids me tell you She thought fit
For to divide this Fair CABAL of WIT.
For one Play it was too long, which was her sorrow,
The other half, if come, you'll see to morrow.
You'll thank her then, dividing it to make
You rise with Appetites, no Surfeits take.
WIT'S Surfet's dangerous: Take the Fruition
Of new-born Fancies without Repetition.
But hold your hands, as you are men to day,
And as our Friends to morrow Clap our Play.

O Ladies, there is the rarest Beauty come to the City, out of the Country, that ever was seen, she sir∣passes Helen of Troy, or AEneas Mother Queen Venus.
If she surpasses their Appetites, as you say she doth their Beauties, she may chance to fire this City with flames of Love, or cause a War to destroy it.
Have you seen her, Mother Matron?
No, but a friend of mine hath seen her.
Perchance your friend's a fool, and knows not how to judge.
Indeed my friend's a woman, and women have none of the best judgments.
But there is more probability that she hath a surpassing beauty if a woman praise her, than if a man had praised her: for men have a partial love to the Effeminate Sex, which multiplies their beauties to their sight, and makes a candle in the night seem like a Blazing Star.
In truth and Love is dark: for it is said he is blind.
But Envy is quick-sighted, and therefore I am afraid the Lady you speak of is surpassing, since those of her own Sex can find no blemish or imperfection to cloud her from a praise.
Ladies, I am come to give you intelligence of a rare Beauty that is come to this City.
Her Fame hath out-run your Intelligence, Sir; but have you seen her?
No Lady, not I.
Ladies, there is a rare Beauty come to this Town to increase the number of your Cabal.
Our Cabal is of Wit, not of Beauty.
It's a Cabal of both, Lady.
Have you seen her?
No Lady, but I have heard of her Beauty.
Ladies, there is such a Beauty come to Town, that now or no∣ver you will be out-shin'd.
Iupiter bless us, and grant that she may not engross to her self all Mankind, and so leave all the rest of her Sex destitute and forlorn!
It is to be hoped she will humble you, as to bring you to be more complyant to us men than you have been.
Have you seen her, Monsieur Sensuality?
No not I.
Why then she is a Miracle, that every one hears of, but no by∣die sees.
May she continue a Miracle still: for I had rather that she should only be heard of, than be visibly seen.
But I will do my endeavour to see her.
So will I.
I long to see her as much as the men do.
So do I.
And I.
And I.
And I.
But how shall we compass the sight of her?
Faith let's go to a Play, I'll warrant you she'll be there.
If she be, we shall only see her Mask, not her Face: for at the common Play-houses all the Effeminate Sex sit masked and muffled.
Why then let us go to that Church which is most frequented, as where some Famous Preachers preach; and certainly, if she be such a Beau∣tie, she will be there: Besides, there our Sex sit to the full View, to Attract the Eyes of the Gods.
No, no, Lady, they sit to the full View, to tempt the Appetites of men: for they think not on the Gods, nor care the Gods should think of them.
Fie, fie, Mother Matron, you will make Women damnable cry∣tures, if they could be made so by your Description: But Women go to Church to present their prayers of Request, and praises of Thanksgiving, and not to show themselves to men, nor to tempt their Appetites, as you say.
Come, come, Ladies, search your own Consciences, and you will find I have spoke the truth: for if you only went to present your prayers to the Gods, you would go as humble petitioners, or sorrowful penitents, cloa∣thed in sackcloth, and ashes on your head; and not attired in gold and sell∣ver, painted, patched, and curled, unless you think the Gods are like to men, to be delighted and enamoured with Vanity, Beauty, and Bravery: for you make the Church a Masking-room, rather than a place of Devotion.
No, we rather strive to make it like Heaven, which is glorious and splendrous; and the Heavenly Society is said to be beautiful.
Yes, such a Heaven, where Mockers are instead of Saints.
Why, Angels are described by Painters to have fine-colour'd
wings, and by Preachers, to hold fine gold branches in their hands, and the Heavens are described to us to be most gloriously adorned, with Diamonds, Rubies, Pearl, Emeralds, Gold, and Crystal, which shows the Gods delight in braveries: Wherefore we, to delight the Gods, make our selves fine and gay.
No, no, Ladies, you strive not to delight the Gods, but to be A∣dor'd and Worshipped as Goddesses by the Masculine Sex, whom you would have to be your Saints.
I know not whether we desire to be Goddesses, or not; But I am sure, if women be as irreligious as you make them to be, they will prove Devils.
And Mother Matron here will prove the chief She-Devil amongst our Sex.
No, no, Lady, I'm devour, for I say my prayers every night and every morning.
May be so you do, and all the time you are saying your prayers, you are thinking of your snarled Periwig, or how you shall trim up your old Gown that was given you by some of our Cabal.
Faith I must confess I have had some such thoughts when I have been at my prayers, God forgive me for it.
And for all you exclame against young Beauties, for there is your spite now your beauty is gone; yet I have observed, that when you are at Church, you will cast your eyes about, and mop and mew, and simpering, bridlde in your Chin, in hopes to catch some beardless boy; and when you look up on the Preachers face, if he be a young Lecturer, it is not out of Attention, of what he preaches, but in hopes to persuade him to marry you, as thinking he would imagine you would make a good Virtuous Religious woman, sit to make a Parsons Wife.
No faith, I will never be a Parsons Wife: for Preachers are go∣ven so much to Contemplation, as they seldom speak but in the pulpit; but if they do, it will be of subjects I understand not, as of such subjects as they have read out of dead Authors.
Why then you will have the more liberty to speak your self, if your Husband speak but seldom.
That's true; but those which love to speak much, are like drun∣kards, which is, they love company: for Questions and Answers are like drinking and pledging, and Arguing is like drinking Healths, and quarrels and friendships, and friendships and quarrels proceed from the one as often as from the other.
Then it seems you are both kind and quarrelsome, both in your talk and drink: for you speak very experienced of both.
So much experience I have, living long in the World, as to know that drink makes one talk, and talking makes one dry.
Well, leaving this dry discourse, Mother Matron, you must find out some way or means whereby we may be acquainted with the rare Beauty which every one talks of,
I will do my endeavour, and employ the wisdom of my brain to compass it.
Madam, there is Monsieur Satirical come to visit you.
Cupped and Venus possess him, and Pallas guard me. Conduct him hither.
Monsieur Satirical, you appear like a Comet to our Sex.
If all your Sex had been like you, I should have been as conver∣sant as one of the Planets.
I hope you have not that Influence on our Sex, as the Planets have on Earthly Creatures.
I wish I had, for then I might cast such an Influence of Love, as might cause you to love me.
But you are like the Planet of Saturn, and not of Venus: for you frown, when Venus smiles.
I shall not do so when you smile.
You will when I quarrel with you.
I hope you will not quarrel with me; but if you do, I will re∣ceive your anger, as subjects receive the punishments of Laws, obediently, although it ruins me.
I will make you Judge of the Cause, as of the Laws. Have I not reason to quarrel with you, when I Challenged you to an Honourable Fight, and you returned my Challenge back with scorn and slight?
Whatsoever my Answer was, I confess I am conquered, and yield my self your prisoner, to dispose of me as you please: But if you will, take a Ransom of current Love, which I have brought you in the Chest of my Heart, wherein it is so fast locked, that nothing but your Acceptance can open it.
If it be capable of being taken forth, I may leave your heart empty.
Your Virtue will still furnish it with more,
Your pure Chastity increase the store.
Your Wit is very apt to take your part,
To keep your own, yet strives to steal my heart:
But if you do not use it nobly well,
It will complain to Gods, the truth will tell.
May I be cursed, my Wit be quenched out,
If I give you a cause my Love so doubt,
Or I your. Virtues highly not admire,
Preferring them before a loose desire,
May all the Gods their vengeance on me cast,
And may their punishments for ever last.
I was in jest at first; but since I find
Your Love so honest, and your words so kind,
I cannot doubt, nor yet my self deny
The union Friendship in firm bonds to tie
Of everlasting love; and if I break,
May Gods be deaf when I in prayers do speak.
Madam, the Poetical Duel hath ended in Friendship, and if you please, in Marriage.
I consent; but do not prize me the less for being soon won for I loved you before you asked my Love; and being asked, I could not de∣ny you.
I value your love as Saints do Heaven, and prize it as highly as Gods their power; and for my crimes committed against you and your Sex, I offer up my heart on the Altar of Repentance, as a sacrifice to you my Goddess for an Atonement of your Anger.
I accept of thy Offering, and shall receive it as a Trophy of my Victory.
I am your slave.
It is said that Women are the greatest Conquerors, because they conquer conquering men, and make them become slaves: For it is said, that Women have conquered the wisest man, as Solomon, the wittiest man, as David, the strongest man, as Simpson, the fairest man, as Paris of Troy, the valiantest man, as Achilles, the subtilest man, as Ulysses, the power-fullest men, as Alexander and Caesar.
By your favour, Women never made a Conquest of the two lat∣la, and therefore cannot be said to be absolute Conquerors: for none are absolute Conquerors but those that conquer power, that is, those that get absolute dominion over all the World, which Alexander and Caesar are said to have done by their Valour and Conduct; and never any Woman or Wo∣men conquered those men, as to get them to yield up their power for a wo∣mans sake, which shows they were not ruled by women, although they loved women; by which it is to be proved, that women never made an absolute Conquest of men, because they could never conquer absolutely those two ab∣solute Conquerors and Masters of the World.
But Livia Conquered Augustus Caesar, and Ruled his Power; and he was as absolute a Master of the Worlds Power, as Iulius Caesar and Alexander.
He was rather to be said the Possessor of the Worlds power, than the absolute Conqueror of the Worlds power.
It is as good to be a Conquers of the possessor of power, as to conquer the Conqueror of power.
It is as good for the Benefit, but not so much for the Honour of it.
But Alexander nor Caesar lived not so long a time, as to be Con∣quer'd by women: for women must have time and opportunity for to gain the Conquest in, as well as men have.
If Alexander and Caesar must have been old before they possibly could have been conquered, it proves that women do rather conquer Age, than power weakens the strength; and the truth is, women conquer no∣thing but the vices, weaknesses, and defects of men: As they can conquer an unexperienced Youth, and doting Age, ignorant Breeding, effeminate Natures, wavering Minds, facile Dispositions, soft Passions, wanton Thoughts, unruly Appetites, and the luxurious Lives of men; but they cannot conquer men's fixed Resolutions, their heroic Valours, their high Ambitions, their magnificent Generosities, their glorious Honours, or their conquering or over-ruling Powers: Nor can women conquer their moral Virtues, as their Prudence, Fortitude, Justice, and Temperance. But put the case a man had the power of the whole World, and could quit that power for the enjoy∣meant of any particular woman, or women, yet he quits not that power for the women's sake, but for his minds-sake, his pleasure-sake, as to satisfy his Fancy, Passion, or Appetites: And what Conpuest soever Women make on Men, if any Conquest they do make, is more by the favour of Nature, than the Gods.
Well, I wish I may be the Conquers of one man, let the fa∣four proceed from which it will.
There hath been such a Skirmish, or rather a Battle.
How, and betwixt whom?
Why, betwixt Grave Temperance and Mother Matron.
What was the cause of their falling out.
Why Mother Matron had a spiced pot of Ale in her hand, so she set it to her mouth, and drank a hearty draught of it, and finding it very good and refreshing, drank another draught. By my faith, said she, this is a cheer∣lie cup indeed, and a comfortable drink, and with that drank another draught, and so long-winded she was, as she drank up all the Ale therein: Where∣upon, Grave Temperance rebuked her for drinking so much, saying, that though a little, as one draught, or so, might refresh the Spirits, yet a great quantity would make her drunk: Whereupon Mother Matron, who could not then suffer a reproof, in anger she flung the pot, which was still in her hand, at Grave Temperance's head.
It was a sign she had drank all the good liquor out, or otherwise she would not have throvvn the pot away.
It was a sign she was drunk, or else she would not have done so outrageous an act, as to have broke Grave Temperances head.
Reprove me! teach me! Have not I lived long enough in the World to be able to govern my self, but Temperance must govern me? Am I a Child? am I a Novice, that I must be governed by Temperance? No,
no, let her go to Nunneries, and let her be the Lady Prioress to govern Nuns, for in faith she shall not Prior me.
Not Friar you, do you say?
No nor Nun me neither: for I will be neither Fryerd, nor Nunn'd.
Why what will you be?
Why what should I be, but as I am, a wise, sober, and discreet Governess to a company of young Ladies? Ladies that love the World better than Heaven, and hate a Nunnery worse than Death; and by my Faith they have reason, for liberty is the joy of life, and the World is the place of sensual pleasures, and sensual pleasures are substantial, and in being, when the pleasures oft death are uncertain; but if they were certain, yet I had rather have a draught of Ale in this World, than a draught of Nectar in the next.
This Ale hath heat her into a Poetical height.
What do you say, into a pots head?
No, I say your head is a pot, filled with the fume of Ale.
What have you to do with my head?
What had you to do with Grave Temperances head?
I would Temperances grave head were in your throat, and then there would be two fools heads one within another.
Come, let's leave her, or she will talk her self into a fit of mad∣ness.
A couple of Gill-flirts, to heat me thus.
Dear Mistress, have you freely pardoned and forgiven me my faults?
Yes.
But will you not reprove me for them hereafter?
In a pardon all faults ought to be forgiven, if not forgotten, and no repetitions ought to be made of the same: for a clear pardon, and a free forgiveness, blots out all offences, or should do so. But you imagine your offences greater than they are, and by your doubts, I to be of less good nature than I am.
There are none that have offended what they love, but fears, and hopes, and doubts, sight Duels in their Minds.
Banish those doubts, and let the hopes remain to build a con∣fident belief to keep out jealousy, otherwise it will take possession, and de∣stroy, at least disturb affection.
Not my affection to you.
For Heavens sake let's go see Mother Matron: for it is said she's mad-drunk.
If she be mad-drunk, she's rather to be shunned than sought after.
Why, do not we give money to see mad people in Bedlam? and we may see her for nothing.
Those people are not madly drunk, nor drunkly mad: for they, poor creatures, drink nothing but water.
Perchance if they did drink strong drink, it might make them so∣barley in their right wits.
Where is Monsieur Frisk? O that Monsieur Frisk were here!
What would you have with Monsieur Frisk?
I would challenge Monsieur Frisk.
What, to sight?
Yes, in Cupids Wars.
By Venus I swear, thou hast been Cashiered from Cupids Wars this thirty years.
Come, come, Ladies, for all your frumps, you are forced to make me General, to lead up the Train, and Generalissimo, to set the Battalion, so that though I am too old to be a common Soldier, I am young enough to be a Commander.
Thou art at this time but a drunken Commander.
If I am drunk, I am but as a Commander ought to be, or as a Commander usually is.
Pray do not accuse Mother Matron: for though her Brain may be a little disturbed, yet her Reason is sober, and governs her Tongue or∣dearly.
O sweet Monsieur Frisk!
If her Reason governs her Tongue, I do not perceive it governs her Humour.
Her Humour, say you, you mean her Appetites.
Passions are begot betwixt the Soul and the Body, the Reason and the Sense; and the Habitation of the Passions is the Heart, which is in the midst of man, as betwixt the Rational part, the Head, and the Sen∣sual Part.
What part is that, Madam?
The bestial part.
What part is the bestial part? for I cannot perceive but beasts and men are alike in most parts.
I am not a Lectural Reader of parts.
One would think you were by your former Discourse.
Why, I may mention parts, without Preaching on parts.
But if Women would Preach of the parts of the Body, and leave Preaching of the Spirit and Soul, it would be better for themselves, their Husbands, Friends, and Neighbours, than it is: And if men would do the like, it would be better for themselves, their wives, and neighbours: But they preach altogether of the Soul, and yet know not what the Soul is.
How would you have them preach of the Body?
First, as for themselves, if they would consider: for they must consider before they Preach, which is, to Teach: If they would consider, I say, how frail the parts of Mankind are, how tender and weak every part of the body is, how apt they are to sickness &amp; diseases, how they are subject more to pain than to pleasure, how difficult it is to keep the body from harm, how soon the body withers, decays, and dies: If Mankind did consider this of the body, they would study what was the guard, and the preservation of every part of the body; in which study they would find Temperance the only preser∣vation of parts, and life of pleasure: for in Excess pleasure dies, and pains possess the body. Thus we can destroy the body sooner by Excess, and pre∣serve it longer by Temperance, than otherwise it would be.
Secondly, for those that are married, temperance keeps both man and wise chaste, patient, and healthful, because gluttony, debauchery, and intemperate anger, hurts the body, and destroys the body. Thus temperance keeps the place of Wedlock: for a Wife being patient, the Husband lives peaceably, being chaste, he lives honourably, being healthful, he lives comfortably; and the Husband, being temperate, he will neither be a Glutton, a Drunkard, an Adulterer, nor Gamester: for gaming hurts the body, with vexing at the losses, and sitting still, which hinders the Exercise of the body, or keeping unseasonable hours, which is pernicious to the health of the Body, as to the quiet of the Mind, and waste of their Estates. Thus a man and wife lives free from jealousies and fear of poverty
Thirdly, for their Neighbours: If they be temperate, they will neither be covetous, quarrelsome, nor envious, which will keep them from doing injury or wrong, and will cause them to be friendly and kind: for if they covet not their neighbours goods, they will not strive to possess their neighbours right; if they be not envious, they will be sociable, and helpful to each other, as good neighbours ought to be: thus they will not vex each other with Law∣suits, and quarrelling Disputes, nor Adulteries, and the like: And if men live peaceably, it is good for the Common-wealth, as being free from faction and tumult: Besides, Peace and Love are the ground whereon all the Com∣mands of the Gods are built on.
You may preach temperance, but few will follow your Do∣ctrine.
Yes, Pleasure will: for without temperance there can be no la∣sting pleasure.
Yonder's Mother Matron so metamorphosed, as at first I did not know her.
How metamorphosed is she?
Most strangely attired for her Age, and as strangely behaved.
How, for Iupiters sake?
Why she hath a green Satin gown on, but it is of an ill-chosen green, for it is of the colour of goos-dung, and an Orange-yellow Feather on her head.
I hope she is not jealous.
Then is she beset with many several coloured Ribbons, as Hair-co∣lore, Watchet, Blush-colour, and White.
What, to express her Despair, Constancy, Modesty, and Inno∣cence?
I think she may despair, but for her constancy, I doubt it, and for modesty, I dare swear she never had any; but if she had, it was so long since, as she hath quite forgot it; as for her innocence, I will leave it to the Exam∣nation or Accusation of her own Conscience.
But how is her behaviour?
Why she simpers, and draws the deep lines in her face into closes, and her wrinkles are the quick-set hedges; then she turns her Eyes aside in coy glances, and her Body is in a perpetual motion, turning and winding, and wreathing about, from object to object, and her Gate is jetting, and sometimes towards a dancing pace; besides, she is toying and playing with every thing, like a Girl of fifteen, and now and then she will sing quavering, as a Note or two betwixt a word or two, after the French and Courtly Mode.
Surely she is mad.
Who's mad?
Mother Matron.
No otherwise than all Amorous Lovers use to be.
Why is she an Amorous Lover?
Yes, a most desperate one.
Who is she so amorously affected with?
With Monsieur Frisk.
Why he is not above one and twenty years of Age.
That's the reason she's in love with him: for it is his youth, and his dancing, she amorously affects him for, for she swears that the very first time she saw him dance, Cupped did wound her, and shot his golden Arrows from the heels of Monsieur Frisk.
Why she is threescore and ten, at least.
That's all one: for Cupped wounds Age as well as youth.
But I had thought that an old women's heart had been so hard Love could not have entered.
Old Mother Matron proves it otherwise: for her Heart is as tender as the youngest Heart of us all.
While I am young I will be a Lover, because I will not be a Fool when I am old.
That's the way to be a Fool whilst you are young, and a Lover when you are old.
No, that is to be a Courtesan whilst she is young, and a Bawd when she is old.
Nay faith, when I can no longer traffic for my self, I will never trade for any other.
Covetousness will tempt your reverent Age.
How shall we entertain our time?
Let us sit and choose Husbands.
What, in the Ashes?
No, in our Speeches.
Content.
Begin; but let your Maids, Lady Pleasure, sit and choose Hus∣bands with us.
If I were to choose a Husband, I would choose a man that was honourably born, nobly bred, wisely taught, civilly behaved; also I would have him to speak rationally, wittily, and eloquently; to act prudently, vali∣antly, justly, and temperately; to live freely, magnificently, and peaceably. I
would have him honourably born, because I would not have him a Boor by Nature, which is surly• rude, grumbling, and miserable: I would have him nobly bred, because I would not have him a Shark, a Cheat, or a Sycophant: I would have him wisely taught, because I would not have him an ignorant fool, nor a pedantical fool: I would have him civilly-behav'd, to please my Eyes: I would have him to speak rational, witty, and eloquent, to please my Ears: I would have him valiant, to defend his Country, to guard his Family, and to maintain his Honour: I would have him prudent, to foresee misfortunes, and to provide for the future, that I may never want for the pre∣sent: I would have him temperate, lest Excess should ruin his Fortune, Health, or Esteem: I would have him just, because others should be just to him; to live freely, as not to be enslaved; to live magnificently, for to be respected; to live peaceably, to avoid brawl•ries. And such a man as this, will be kind to his Wife, loving to his Children, bountiful to his Servants, courteous to his Friends, civil to Strangers, faithful to his Trust, and just to his Promise.
If I were to choose a Husband, I would choose a man that were Rich, honoured with Titles, and were Powerful. I would have him Rich, because I would have him live plentifully, to feed luxuriously, to be adorned gloriously: I would have him to have Titles of Honour, because I would take place of my Neighbours, to have the chief place at a Feast, and to have the first and choicest meats offered me: I would have him Powerful, to oppose my Opposers, to insult over my Enemies, and to neglect my Friends; which, if I be poor and helpless, they will do me: Thus I shall be honoured by my Superiors, crouched to by Inferiors, flattered by Sycophants, bragged of by my Friends, obeyed by my Servants, respected by my Acquaintance, envied by my Neighbours, sought to by my Enemies. Thus I might ad∣vans my Friends, punish my Enemies, tread down my Superiors, enslave my Inferiors, insult over my Foes, and enthrone my self.
If I were to choose a Husband, I would choose a man whom all other men are slaves to, and he mine. And what can I desire more than to be absolute?
If I were to choose, I would choose a man for a Husband that were an honest and plain-dealing man, patient and wise, that I might neither be deceived by his falsehood, nor troubled with his quarrels, nor vexed with his follies.
If I were to choose a Husband, I would choose a subtle crafty Knave, that can cheat an honest Fool, with which cheats I can entertain my time, like those that go to see Jugglers play tricks.
If I were to choose a Husband, I would choose a man that were blind, deaf, and dumb, that he might neither trouble me with his imperti∣nent Questions, nor see my indiscreet Actions, nor hear my foolish Discour∣ses: Thus I may say what I will, and never be crossed, do what I will, and no∣ver be hindered, go where I will, and never be watched, come when I will, and never be examined, entertain whom I will, and never be rebuked. Thus I may Govern as I will, Spend as I will, Spare as I will, without Control∣meant.
If I were to choose a Husband, I would choose a man that were industrious, thrifty, and thriving: for the pleasure is not so much to enjoy, as getting, like those that are hungry, have more pleasure in eating their meat, than when their stomachs are full.
If I were to choose a Husband, I would choose a man that were a busy Fool, which would continually bring me fresh, although false News: for his busy mind, which fills his Head with Projects, which Projects will feed my excessive Ambition, with his high Designs, although improbable, and set my thoughts at work with his several Achievements, although there is no leading-path therein: But howsoever, this will furnish my Imagine∣tion, employ my Thoughts, please my Curiosity, and entertain my time with Varieties, wherein, and wherewith, I may pass my life with fine Phantasms, or like a fine Dream.
It is a sign you love sleep excessively well, so as you would have your life pass as a dream.
Why, Madam, sleeping is the lifes Elizium, and our dreams the pastime therein, and our beds are our living graves, to the greatest part of our life, and most are best pleased therein: for it gives rest to our wearied and tired limbs, it revives the weak and fainting spirits, it eases the sick and pain∣ed, it pacifies the grieved, it humours the melancholy, it cherishes age, it now∣riches youth, it begets warmth, it cools heat, it restores health, it prolongs life, and keeps the mind in peace.
I will not choose, but wish and pray, which is, if ever I marry, I pray Jove that I may out-live my Husband.
O sie, Women pray that their Husbands may out-live them?
If they do, in my Conscience they dissemble, but howsoever I will never pray so: for I perceive when men are Widowers, they are more hasty to marry again than Bachelors are, and the last love blots out the first, and I should be sorry to be blotted out.
But if men do marry after they have buried their first Wife, yet perchance they will not love their second Wife so well as the first.
I know not that, but yet to the outward view I perceive a man seems to forget his first Wife in the presence of his second Wife.
By your favour, a second Wife puts a Husband in remembrance of his first Wife, either for goodness or badness.
For my part, I would not be kept in remembrance by one in my room; but howsoever, I shall love my self better than I'm sure I shall love my Husband, and therefore I desire to live long: for I had rather live and have him in remembrance, than die and to forget him; and I had rather re∣member than be remembered.
O Temperance, I heard say that you have seen the rare Beauty, Mademoiselle la Belle.
And is she so handsome as she is reported to be?
Truly she is a pretty young Lady.
Is she only a pretty Lady?
Why she is young, and those that are very young, are only pretty; but those that are at full growth are beautiful and handsome, and those in their Autumnal years are Lovely, and those that are old are ill-favour'd.
No, no, those Women that have been once handsome, never grow ill-favour'd.
Well, setting aside old women, what say you to the young Lady?
I say she is handsomer at a distance than neer-hand.
That's well, for then her praises will be only at a distance.
No by'r Lady, she hath Beauty enough to be praised to her face.
I had rather appear handsomer at a distance than at a near view, than seem worse at a distance, and handsomer at a near view.
Why so?
By reason there is no Woman but is seen more by strangers than acquaintance; besides, whole streets of people view Ladies as they pass through in their Coaches, when perchance not above half a dozen neigh∣bours and acquaintance see them near hand.
So you may have many Admirers, but few Lovers.
Faith the rarest Beauties that ever were, the more they were known and seen, the less Esteemed and Admired they were: for an unac∣quainted face appears, or at least pleases better, although but an indifferent Beauty, than a common face, although it excels with Beauty.
Did you not hear Mademoiselle la Belle speak?
No faith, she may be dumb for any thing I know.
How is she behaved?
After the Country Mode.
What manner of Woman is her Mother?
A Country Lady.
Faith if Mademoiselle la Belle hath neither Wit nor Behaviour, her Beauty will be dim'd for the want of either: for Wit and Behaviour are the Polishers of Beauty, otherwise Beauty is but like a Diamond unfil'd, or unpolished, or like gold untried, or unresin'd.
Nay Ladies, she may have a great Wit for all that I know: for she did not express either simplicity or ignorance, whilst I was in her company she spake not one word.
Let us examine no more, but let us go see her, and then dis∣course with her.
Pretty Maid, would you speak with me?
Yes, and if it please your Worship.
From whom come you?
From my Mistress.
Who is your Mistress?
Mother Matron.
What Message hath Mother Matron sent to me?
She hath sent your Worship a Letter, and desires your Worship to send her an Answer.
Go and stay within, and I will give you an Answer.
This Letter is concerning some of the young Ladies that are in Love with me.
Blessed Letter, that art the Messenger of Love, the Presenter of Youth, Beauty and Wit, and the Inviter to Pleasure.
O Dear Monsieur Frisk, since I last saw you, and heard you speak so wisely, as that you would wait upon the Ladies, and proffer so kindly, as to proffer me a kiss, meeting you in the Lane called Loves Folly. O that Lane, that fortunate or unfortunate Lane! for as my wishes succeed, the Lane proves good or bad: for since that time of meeting, I have loved you, or rather, I may say, I have been in Love with you, or rather, I may say, I have Fancied you beyond all other young Gentlemen, and I hope you will return the like to me: For though I am not in my blooming Beauty, yet I am not quite decayed, but there remains some fresh colour, wherewith a young Gentleman may take delight; and let me tell you, the Autumn is more plea∣sant than the Spring, for the Spring is raw and cold, the Autumn is warm and com∣fortable: wherefore let me persuade you, sweet Monsieur Frisk, to choose the Au∣tumnal fruits, and reject the Springing buds, which are insipid and tasteless: Ripe fruit's are better than green, and VVinter-fruits more lasting than the fruits of the Summer: Staid Gravity is more happy to live with, than wilde Inconstancy; the wisdom of Age is more profitable than the follies of Youth; not that I say I'm old, nor pray think me not so, but that I am as wise as Age can make me, and Wisdom is not a portion that is given to every one, yet what wisdom I have, I will impart to you, sweet Monsieur Frisk, you shall be the Receiver; the Treasurer, and the Dis∣poser; also with my wisdom I give my heart, with my heart I give you my person, which wisdom, heart, and person, is not to be despised: for by my wisdom you will receive Counsel, with my heart Love, and with my person that Beauty Time hath left me, who like a cheating knave, hath robed me of some, but yet there is enough left, dear Monsieur Frisk, to delight your view: for although I am not like Helen of Greece, yet I am like Helen, when she was Helen of Troy, for then, by my faith, she was in her Autumnal years, as I am, which was about fifty, or by'r Lady, somewhat more, and then she was as dear to her Paris, witness Troy, and as much de∣sired of her of....witness the Greeks, as when she was but fifteen. Wherefore, dear Frisk, let me be thy Helen, and be thou my Paris, and let our Loves be as bright as the fire of Troy, but not so consuming; but if thou deny'll me, I shall consume in mine own flames, and be buried in mine own ashes, which will fly in the face of thy cruelty, to revenge me thy
A pox of her luxurious Appetite, to be Amorous at fourscore, one might have thought, nay sworn, that Cupids fire had been put out with Times Extinguisher; but I perceive by Mother Matron, that time hath no power over that Appetite, but I am forty time hath made her such a creature, as not to be capable of curses, for she is her self a curse beyond all I could give her; but if she were capable, I would bury her under a mountain of curses, for
raising up my hopes to the height of young beautiful Ladies by the outside of the Letter, and then frustrating my expectation by the inside, causing me to fall from the bower of bliss, into the grave of life, the habitation of death; from a young Beauty, to an old doting Woman: Oh, I will tear this letter that hath deceived me; but stay, I will keep this letter to make sport a∣amongst the young Ladies, which sport may perchance insinuate me into some favour with the young Ladies: for as idle and ridiculous pastime, or means as this is, hath got many times good success amongst Ladies: wherefore I will, for their sport-sake, jestingly Court Mother Matron, and in the mean time of the Progress, write her a letter.
I hear, Mademoiselle Ambition, you are to marry Monsieur Vain-glorious.
No, for I am too honest to marry one man, and love, admire, and esteem another man beyond him; but when I marry, I will marry such a one as I prize, honour, love, and admire above all other men, or else I will never marry.
What man could you esteeem, honour, and love most?
He that I thought had the noblest Soul, and had done the most worthiest Actions.
But put the case that man that were as you would have him, were so engaged as you could not enjoy him in lawful marriage?
I could lawfully enjoy him, although I could not lawfully mar∣rye him.
As how?
As in Contemplation, for I could enjoy his Soul no otherwise, if I were married to him: for if I were married, I could but contemplate of his Merits, please my self with the thoughts of his Virtues, honour his gene∣rous Nature, and praise his Heroic Actions: And these I can do as much, although I should live at distance from him, nor never be his Wife: for the marriage of Bodies, is no enjoyment of Souls.
This would only be an opinion of delight, but no true enjoy∣meant of pleasure: for though an Opinion may affright the Soul, yet the O∣pinion cannot pleasure the Body. But say an Opinion could delight the Soul without the Senses, yet the pleasures of the Senses are to be preferred before the delight of the Soul: for the truth is, that the spirits of life take more de∣light in sensual pleasures, than in the Souls imagination: for life lives in the Senses, not in the Soul: for were there no Senses, there would be no Life.
By your favour, there is life in the Soul, when Death hath extin∣guish'd the Senses.
That's more than you know, you believe it only upon report; but who hath had the trial or experience of the truth of it? So that the re∣port is upon an unknown ground, and your belief is built upon an unsure Foundation.
What belief is for my advantage, I will strive and endeavour to strengthen it, on what foundation soever it's built upon.
You will pardon me, pretty Maid, for causing you to stay so long, for an Answer of your Mistress's Letter.
There requires no pardon Sir, for I have been very well entertained by your man, I thank him.
I perceive my man hath had better fortune than his Master, for he hath had youth to entertain; but I hope if you receive the mans entertain∣meant so thankfully, you will not refuse the Masters.
My Mistress would be jealous of your Worship, if you should en∣tertain me.
Why, doth your Mistress love me so much?
So much, as she cannot sleep quietly for dreaming of you; nor lets me sleep: for she wakes me every night to tell me her dreams.
What dreams she?
One dream was, she dreamed that she was Diana, and you A∣cteon.
What, to set horns on my head?
No, my Mistress said, that she in her dream did more as a Godess ought to have done, than Diana did: for she was generous in her dream, and not cruel, for instead of horning you, she invited you into her Bath.
I hope you were one of her Nymphs.
Another time she dreamed you were Mercury, and she Herce; and another, that she was Venus, and you Atones; but the last night she awaked out of a fearful dream.
What dream was that?
She dreamed that she was Queen Dido, and you the Prince AEneas, and when you were shipped and gone away, she stabbed her self.
If she were Dido, I should prove AEneas.
On my Conscience she fetched as many sighs when she awaked, and made as many piteous complaints and lamentations, as if her dream had been true, and she really bad been Queen Dido, insomuch as I was afraid that she would have killed he self indeed, and was running forth the Chamber to call in company to hinder her, but that she commanded me to stay, saying, that it was but the passion of her dream, for she hoped that you would prove a more constant and faithful Lover, than to leave her to despair.
The next time she is in the same passion, tell her I will be like
AEneas, meet her in Hell: In the mean time carry her this Letter.
Lord, Lord, she will be a joyed woman, to receive a letter from you, and I shall be a welcome Messenger unto her, and the letter will be worth a new gown to me.
I wish it may be a gown of price to thee.
How shall I pacify my companions, or qualify their spleens? who will be in a furious rage, when they perceive and know my real love to you: for they made me as their hook to the line of their Angle, and hope to catch you like a Gudgion.
All that Angle do not catch; yet you have drawn me forth of the salt Satirical Sea.
But their desire is, that you should lie gasping on the shore of Love.
Would they be so cruel, as not to throw me into a fresh River?
No: for they joy in the thought of your torments, and their general prayers are to Cupped, imploring him to wound you with a golden-headed Arrow, and she you love, with an Arrow headed with lead: As for their particular prayers, they are after this manner.
One prays you may sigh your self into Air, and the Air so infectious, as it may plague all the Satirical of your Sex.
Another prays you may weep tears of Vitriol, and that the sharpness of those tears may corrode your soul.
Another prays that your passion of love may be so hot, as it may torment you, as Hell-fire doth the damned; but Mother Matron, besides saying A∣men to all their prayers, makes her prayers thus, That she for whose sake you must endure all these torments, may be the oldest, and most ill-favour'd de∣formed woman that ever Nature, Accident, and Time made.
She would have me in Love with her self, it seems by her prayer.
If she did hear you, she would die for want of Revenge.
But Mistress, what prayer made you for me?
Not a cursing prayer: for though Mother Matron would have carried me up to the top of the Hill of Rage, and instead of a prayer for you, there to have made curses against you, yet she could neither force me up the one, nor persuade me to the other: for I told her I would give a blessing instead of a curse, and for fear of that, she left persisting.
I perceive I had been in danger, had not you saved me, and like a merciful Godess kept me from their fury; but I'm afraid, that for my sake they will curse you now.
No doubt of it; but the best of't is, that their cursing prayers, or prayers of curses, go no farther than their lips.
For all their furious rage, self-conceit persuades me, that if I
had addressed my self as a Suitor to any one of them, they would have been more merciful than to have denied my suit.
I can think no otherwise: for I shall judge them by my self.
Pray let's go, and invite them to our Wedding.
By no means: for they will take that as ill, as if you did in∣did invite them to a poisoned Banquet: But if I may adv•se, it is not to tell them our Design, but let them find it out themselves.
I shall agree to your Counsel.
Come, come, I have watched and longed for your Return a∣bove two hours, I may say above two years, for so the time did seem to me. O Venus, thou Fair and Amorous Godess, send me a comfortable Answer, if it be thy will!
I have brought you a Letter from Monsieur Frisk; but for my part I know not what comfort he hath sent you.
O Cupped, O Cupped, be my friend!
THough Time hath made you sit for Heaven, having worn out your body, a sub∣stance for Love to work upon, converting or translating it all into Soul, an in∣corporeal shadow, which none but the Gods can employ to any use; yet since you E∣steam and Love me as a God, to resign up that incorporality, I can do no less than re∣turn you thanks, although I never did merit such a gift: But my sins, I confess are many, and deserve great punishments, yet I hope the Gods will be more merciful, than to leave me void of reason, or to suffer Nature to make me to have extravagant ap∣petites, or Heaven to leave me to extravagant appetites; but howsoever, as occa∣sions fall out, I shall show reverence to your Motherly Gravity, and in the mean time rest
I know not by this Letter whether he will be my Lover, or not; yet I will kiss it for his sake.
O sweet Letter, thou happy Paper, that hast received the pressure of this hand! What did he say when he gave you this letter to bring me?
He talked of Pluto, and of Hell.
How, of Hell!
Yes, but it was concerning AEneas and Dido.
I hope he will not make me such an Example as Queen Dido, nor himself so false a Lover as AEneas; but if he should, I will cry out, O thou my cruel AEneas hast slain me!
Now I have seen Mademoiselle la Belle, I perceive Fame gives more praise than Nature Beauty.
To some she doth.
Nay faith, for the most part, to all.
O Ladies, there is the greatest loss befallen me, that ever be∣fell man!
What loss?
Why Mademoiselle la Belle is gone.
How gone? Is she married, or dead?
Faith she's as bad as dead to me, and worse than if she were married: for if she were a Wife, there would be some hopes; but her careful Father hath carried her away into the Country, being jealous of the much company that came to visit her.
It seems he knew she was apt to be caught, that he durst not trust her: But how came you to receive a greater loss than the rest of the Masculine Visitors?
Because I had greater hopes than I perceive the rest had.
Why, had you a design to get her for a Wife?
No faith, mine was a better design, which was to get her for a Mistress.
But it was likely she would never have been your Mistress.
It was likely she would have been my Mistress: for she was fair and foolish, kind and toyish, and had an inviting Eye.
Why you may follow her into the Country.
No, the City is so well stored, as I shall not need to put my self to that trouble, as to journey after her.
O Love! thou tormentor of soft hearts, or a melter of hard ones, soften the hard heart of Monsieur Frisk, and ease my soft and tender heart, inflame his spirits to love, and refresh mine with his kindness: O Venus, persuade thy Son in my behalf, and consider me by thy self! Ha, ho!
I would never have an extraordinary Beauty seen but once, and that should be in a public Assembly.
It is a sign, Temperance, your beauty is past: for would you have an extraordinary Beauty to be buried in oblivion?
No: for I would have all the World see, if it could be shown to the whole World; but I would have it shown but once, and no more.
Why so?
Because what is common, is never highly prized, but rather despised, or at least neglected by continuance: for that which is at first ad∣mired as a wonder, when it comes to be as domestic, is not regarded: for it is an old saying, That the greatest wonder lasts but nine days.
But there is such a sympathy betwixt beauty and sight, that as long as beauty doth last, sight will take delight to look thereon; and the De∣sign, End, or Fruition of Beauty, is to be gazed upon: for from the sight it receives Praise, Love, and Desire, and by reflection sets all hearts on fire.
O that I had such a Beauty as would burn every Masculine heart into cinders!
Why are you so cruel, Lady, to wish such a wish to the Masculine Sex?
My wish proceeds out of love to my self, and mercy to men. First, out of love to my self: for as I am a woman, I naturally desire Beau∣tie, and there is no woman that had not rather have beauty, although atten∣ded with an unfortunate life, than be ill-savour'd, to enjoy prosperity.
The last wish is out of mercy to men: for their hearts are so false and foul, as no way but burning can purify them.
That were the way to try their constancy.
For my part, if it were in my power to choose, I would rather have Wit than Beauty: for Wit pleases the Ear, both longer and more, than Beauty pleases the Sight, and the sound of the one, spreads farther
than the sight of the other: Besides, Wit recreate• the Mind, and entertains the Reason, Beauty only the Sense, and but one sense, as the sight, when Wit is a companion not only to the sense of Hearing, but the soul of Understand∣ing; and it is not only a delightful Companion, but a subtle Observer, an ingenious Inventor, an excellent Artificer, a politic Counsellour, a power∣full Commander, a prudent Ruler, and a divine Creator; it observes all natures works; it invents all useful Arts, it frames all Commonwealths, it guides the Senses, rules the Appetites, commands the Passions, counsels the Thoughts, re∣gulates the Opinions, creates the Conceptions, Imaginations, and Fancies; it builds Potiecal Castles, and makes Gardens of Rhetoric, and makes the sound Harmonical, playing with words, as on musical Instruments: Besides, Wit continues to old Age, when Beauty vades in a year or two.
Come, come, Temperance, if you were young, you would prefer Beauty before a Wit, by which you might get more pleasure by the one, than profit by the other: But all our Sex, when they grow in years, desire to be thought Wits, when they can no longer be thought Beauties, which makes them dispute for Wit, and dispraise Beauty, by undervaluing it.
Mademoiselle Bon' Esprit, you are welcome: for we long to hear the success of your design, since we have heard that Monsieur Satirical hath been to visit you, hath he not?
Yes.
But have you caught him?
Sure enough.
Then strangle him with Cupids bow-string.
Hang him, that's not punishment enough.
No; but when he's a confirmed Lover, report he's mad.
We shall not need to report that: for when he is a confirmed Lover, he will do such ridiculous actions, and behave himself so extravagant∣lie vain, and so constrainly foolish, and speak such non-sense, in striving to speak beyond the power of words, insomuch as all that hear and see him, will swear he's mad.
They will swear nothing but the truth; for all Lovers are mad, more or less. But Mademoiselle Bon' Esprit, are you sure you have him in Cu∣pids snare?
I do verily believe I have him in Loves bonds.
O how I joy, to think how we shall triumph!
What shall our Triumphant-Chariot be?
Scorns, scorns, set on the wheels of laughter, drawn by a company of lame, sore, scurvy words.
Will you have your Triumphant-Chariot drawn by a com∣pany of foolish words? that will be as bad, and as much disgrace, as lean-jaded horses in a brave gilded Coach.
No, no, sprightly jests were better.
They may chance to run you out of the field of Civility, at least out of the right ways of Wit.
Let them run where they will, so they carry his reproach with them.
Will you carry this reproach along with you, and leave him behind you?
We will carry his reproach about the World.
While you bear the burden, he will rest at home in ease and peace in his mind.
Good Lord, what makes you thus to contradict our Designs?
I do not contradict your Designs, but show you the Error of your Conduct.
Why then conduct us better.
So I shall, if you will give me leave: for I shall conduct you through the fair ways: of peace, and not through the foul ways of malice, which are myery and deep with revenge, in which you may stick, or be thrown in disgrace; but I will carry you through the sweet Meadows of good Nature, wherein runs clear Rivulets of Charity, in which you may bathe your selves under the fruitful trees of good works, and take the fresh Air of Applause, and be cooled with the soft winds of Praise. Thus washed, cleansed, and refreshed, you will be fit to enter into the Palace of Fame.
Heyday, where will your Tongue carry us?
As high as it can, even to the House of Fame, which stands on the highest pinnacle of Heaven.
Let me examine you, Are you not carried by love to the top of Parnassus Hill?
By Iupiter, she that went to catch Love, is caught by Love her self.
Venus forbid: for that would be such a disgrace, as we shall be never able to pull off, or rub out.
What you cannot rub out, or pull off, you must be content to wear with patience.
I suspect her.
I confess I doubt her.
I fear your doubts.
I am confident we have lost her, striving to catch him.
Let us follow her, and examine her.
I hear that thou intend to be a married man shortly.
Yes faith, I am going to put my neck into the noose.
Nay, if you noose it, hang it; for the noose of marriage is ten times worse than the halter of death.
I am not of your Opinion.
Why then thou art not of a wise opinion: for in Death there is no trouble, and in Marriage no quiet.
A single life is melancholy, being solitary.
So I perceive rather than you'll want company, thou wilt asso∣ciate thy self with cares and vexations.
No, I will associate my self with Wife and Children.
Well, let me tell you, if that thou merriest, a hundred to one but thou wilt be a Cuckold.
I hope not.
How can thou have hopes, when that the Gods are Cock∣olds? wherefore it is impossible mortal men should escape.
All the Gods are not so, it is but only limping Vulcan that is one.
Pardon me: for if their divine Wives make them not Cuckolds, yet their humane Wives do.
But the Gods marry not humane creatures.
But humane creatures marry the Gods, and that is all one: for in all Religions there are Nuns are the Gods humane wives; and did not Cataline Cuckold the Gods, when he lay with a Vestal Nun? And many more are mentioned in Story, and you may well believe all are not Re∣corded.
Well, if the Gods be Cuckolds, I may have the less cause to murmur, if I should be one: for it is an honour to be like the God.
Well, I wish as thy friend, that thou may flourish in that Honour.
We do not like your dark Answers: for Truth is clear.
Confess, have you deceived us, or not?
I have not deceived you: for you did entrust me to draw him to Love, and to be in love as a Lover, and I have discharged your trust, and have brought your designs to pass.
But our designs were not that he should be beloved of you, but hated of all our Sex.
Why then you did spread your designs beyond your reach: for do you think you have the power of Fate, to rule, govern, and dispose of the passions of Mankind as you please, when alas you are so powerless, as you cannot rule, govern, and dispose of your own passions, and so ignorant, that you know not your own destinies, nor how, nor to what your passions will lead you to: Besides, you enjoined not my passions, you did not for∣bid me to love him, but only employed my Wit to make him a Lover, and so I have.
And you have proved your self a Fool, in becoming a Lover.
Losers may have leave to speak any thing, and therefore I will not quarrel with you.
We are not losers by the loss of you.
But we are, for with the loss of her, we have lost our sweet re∣avenge: for by her we thought to have caught him like a Woodcock in a Net, and then to have cut off his wings of Fancy, and to have pulled out his feathers of Pride, or else to have enticed him like a fool with a rattle, and then to have tossed him on Satirical Tongues, as in a blanket of shame: But now, instead of a blanket of shame, he will lie in the Arms of Beauty, and instead of being tossed with satirical tongues, he will be flattered with kisses, for which we may curse the Fates.
But it is strange to me, that she can love such a railing ill-natured man as Monsieur Satirical.
I wonder she doth not blush at her choice! Are you not out of countenance, to be in love with such a man, that is the worst of men?
Confess, do not you repent?
So far am I from repenting, as I love him so well, as he seems to me to be such a person, as to be so much above the rest of Mankind, as he ought to be adored, worshipped, kneeled down and prayed to, as to a Deity; and the beginning of those prayers offered to him should be, O thou worthy∣est, meritoriousest, and hest of men!
She's mad, she's stark mad: wherefore let us bind her with chains, and whip her with cords, to bring her to her wits again.
Oh Sir, you are a person born to relieve the distressed, and comfort the afflicted: for you are come in a timely hour, to release me from a company of Furies that threaten me.
These Ladies appear too fair to be the daughters of Night, who are said to be the Furies. But Ladies, I hope you will pardon me for taking away so pleasing a companion from you as my Mistress is; but by her I shall be made Master of a world of happiness, and I shall not only enjoy a world, but a Heavenly Paradise, wherein all Goodness, Virtues, Beauties, and sweet Graces are planted: And what man would not challenge or claim Heaven, if Heaven could be gained by claiming; wherefore I challenge and claim this Lady, as being mine to enjoy.
If you had challenged or claimed any other Lady, in my consci∣ence you would have been refused.
I desire no more than what I have.
I could cry with anger.
Ladies, take my counsel, which is, to be friends with Ma∣dam Bon' Esprit, and Monsieur Satirical, otherwise they will laugh at you to see what fools they have made you.
She gives us good advice; wherefore let us follow it, and be friends.
I may be seemingly friends, but never really friends.
Why seeming friendship passes and traffiques as well in the world, as those that are real.
You say well: wherefore let us seem to be friends.
My fair Maid, what Message have you brought me now?
My Mistress remembers her loving love unto you, and bids me tell you, that she takes it wondrous unkindly that you showed the young La∣dies the Letter, and that she heard you mocked and jeered at her.
Tell her I did but as all Lovers use to do, vaunt of their Mistress's love, and boast of their Mistress's favours.
She doth not like your boasting; but howsoever, to show and ex∣press her constant love and affectionate heart, she hath sent you two hun∣dred pounds to buy you a Nag.
I accept of the Present, and tell her I will ride the Nag for her sake.
My Mistress will be a joyed Woman, to hear that you will ride for her sake.
But is thy Mistress rich?
Yes by my truth is she; for she hath store of bags in her Chests.
But are they full of gold and silver?
Yes: for I have seen her tell the money in the bags, bag after bag.
Is it all her own?
Yes certainly it is all her own.
How came she to be so rich?
Why the young Ladies Parents give her money or moneys worth to Govern and Educate their Daughters, and the young Ladies bribe her to keep their counsels, and fee her to be their Agent, and their Courtly Servants present her with rich gifts to prefer their Suits, and to speak in their behalfs to the young Ladies; and thus she gains on every side, and takes gifts on both hands, and she being miserable and sparing, must needs be rich; but now she is become a Lover, she begins to grow prodigal, as all Lovers are; but if she had a million, she says, nay swears, she could bestow it all on her beloved, which beloved is your Worship.
I could be well content to marry her wealth, and lie with her Maid, but I would not be troubled with the Mistress.
My Mistress, I believe, will be a very fond Wife.
And that fondness is the second obstacle I stick at: for first to be old, and then to be fond, will be a double misery, as being an intolerable trouble, and a nauseous vexation; for there is nothing more hateful, than an amorous fond old woman: But if thou wilt be fond of me, I shall like it well; and if any thing could persuade me to marry thy Mistress, next to her wealth, will be in hopes of thy kindness. What say you, will you be kind?
I shall not be undutiful: when you are my Master, I shall deny no service I can do your Worship.
That's well promised: In the mean time remember me to thy Mi∣stress, and thank her for her Present, and tell her, the more such Presents she sends, the welcomer they shall be.
Mademoiselle, you may do a charitable Act.
As how?
As to marry me.
If it be a Charity to you, it would be none to my self, but the contrary: I should prove cruel to my self, in making my life unhappy.
Yet it will be a meritorious Act: for what is more meritori∣os than to save a soul?
So I shall rob Pluto of his due and just right.
He will never miss his loss: for on my Conscience he is not so good an Arithmetician, as he could count and number the Millions of souls he hath in Hell, or those he hath right to; nay, if he had the skill of Utlick, he could not number them, for they surmount all Accounts.
But the torments he puts souls, to will •end them out.
It is a question whether souls are capable of torments; but howsoever; to put it out of question, pray marry me: for I am become of a sudden very consentious.
But there will be another question, which is, Whether Marriage will save you, or not?
O yes: for the Purgatory of Marriage doth purify Souls, and make them fit for Heaven.
But I fear, if I should marry you, I should do like those that strive to save a drowning man; so I, endeavouring to save you, should lose my self.
There is no Honourable Act, without some danger to the Actor.
But all wise Actions have security.
There is no security in Nature.
I will consider, although after a wise consideration I do a foolish action, as most considerers do.
Madam, I hear I live in your good Opinion.
Your merits do.
I hope if you do esteem my merits, if I have merits to be esteemed, you will not despise my Person, nor deny my Suit.
I esteem of your person for your merits sake, and those that have merits, and are worthy, will make no ignoble Suit: wherefore I may grant it before I know it.
My Suit is, to accept of me for your Husband.
I shall not deny to be your Wife.
Well met, Monsieur Heroical, and Mademoiselle Ambition.
Now we are all met, how shall we pass the time away?
Nay rather, how shall we recreate our time?
Let us sit and declare what we love or hate.
Agreed,
Shall we declare our love or our hate first?
Our love first.
Nay faith let love close up our discourse.
Then let hate be the Gentleman-Usher.
She will usher you into foul ways.
Let her usher us into as foul ways as she will, we will foal∣low her.
Begin, begin.
I hate poverty: for that dejects the Spirits, and oppresses the Life.
I hate falsehood: for that deceives my Reason, and blind-folds my Senses.
I hate a fool, because he obstructs my Understanding, and sets my Brain on the Rack.
I hate noise, because it disturbs my thoughts, hurts my hearing, and buries sense, reason, and auricular words.
I hate sickness, because it is a friend to Death.
I hate vain follies, because they bring neither content, pleasure, nor profit.
I hate a Court, because it puts Modesty out of countenance, Patience out of humour, and Merit out of favour.
I hate a slavish Peace, because there is no employment for noble active spirits.
I hate truth, because it tells me my faults.
I hate truth, because it hinders my search thereof.
I hate motion, because therein there is no rest.
I hate rest, because it makes no Inquiries.
I hate life, because therein is more pain and trouble than plea∣sure or peace.
I hate restraint, because it inslaves life.
I hate a Nunnery, because it doth not only restrain, but bar out Sex from the sight of men.
Thou love men well, that their very sight delights thee.
I hate light, because it discovers Lovers.
I hate darkness, because it conceals Adulteries.
I hate a chaste Beauty, because she quenches my hopes, and inflames my desires.
I hate Mademoiselle la Belle, because Monsieur Sensuality did like her.
I hate Age: for that vades Beauty, and banishes Lovers.
No more of Age and Hate, take Love without Beauty.
Mother Matron would have you take her.
Nay faith we will leave Mother Matron, and begin with Love.
I love plenty: for in plenty lives happiness.
I love freedom: for in freedom lives pleasure.
By your favour, Plenty may want happiness, and Freedom pleasure.
I love to go to Church.
What, to hear a Sermon?
No, to meet a Mistress.
Out upon thee thou Reprobate, would you make a Church a Bawdy-house?
No, I would make that place where Beauties were, a Church, and the fairest should be the Godess I would pray to.
There are not any that are fair will hear you.
And those that are foul I will not pray to.
Follow Love: for that makes all things fair and pleasing.
I love silence: for in silence my life lives easily, my thoughts freely, and my mind harmoniously.
Sometimes the thoughts disturb the mind, and so the life, more than noise disturbs the thoughts.
I love Honour: for in Honour lives Respect.
I love Beauty: for in Beauty lives admiration.
I love Fame: for in Fame lives the memory of the best of my Actions.
I love power: for in power lives Adorations.
I love Wit: for that delights my self, and recreates my friends.
I love Eloquence: for that delights my Ear.
But Eloquence will deceive your Judgment, delude your Understanding, and flatter your Passions with insinuating persuasions, and will draw you into an Erroneous Belief, and by that unto unjust actions.
I love Mademoiselle Portrait.
I love Monsieur Sensuality.
I love Mademoiselle Ambition.
I love Monsieur Heroic.
I love Mademoiselle Bon' Esprit.
I love Monsieur Satirical.
I love Mademoiselle Superb.
I love Monsieur Vain-glorious.
I love Mademoiselle Pleasure.
I love Monsieur Tranquillitous Peace.
I love Mademoiselle Faction.
I love Monsieur Censure.
I love ma filia Excess.
I love Monsieur Busy.
I love ma filia Wanton.
I love Monsieur Liberty.
I love a single life: for in Marriage lives too much trouble to live in Ease.
I love to continue a Widow: for Temperance is banished from most places and persons.
I love Monsieur Frisk; but Monsieur Frisk loves not me.
Faith I'll persuade him to love, if not thy person, yet thy wealth; for thou art rich, and he hath hardly enough means to bear up his Gentility: Besides, one Maid and one Widow is enough, more would be too much.
And one Bachelor.
Who's that?
Monsieur Inquisitive.
Faith it is fit and proper he should live a Bachelor: for an In∣quisitive Husband would not be good, neither for his own sake, nor his Wives.
But Gentlemen and Ladies, although you all say you love such a Lady, and such a Lady loves such a Gentleman, yet you do not say you will marry each other.
You may be sure, if we do publicly profess love, we intend to marry: for though we may love and not marry, or marry and not love, yet not profess it in an open Assembly; for Love without Marriage lives incognito.
But marriage without love is visible enough: for it lies to the view of all their neighbours knowledge.
Well, noble Gentlemen, and virtuous Ladies, if you resolve all to marry, I would advise you to marry all in one day.
O Madam Temperance, you are sick.
Why?
By reason healthful temperance never gives such surfeiting coun∣sell: for there are as many of us as might be marrying a year, and keeping their Festivals, and you would have all married in one day.
Madam Temperance means, she would have a whole year as one Wedding-day
And one Wedding-day to the Bride and Bridegroom, is as one whole year.
Not to every Bride and Bridegroom: for on my Conscience Monsieur Frisk, if he should marry Mother Matron, will think his Wedding-day but a minute long.
But Mother Matron will think the day an Age.
You speak so loud, she'll hear you.
O no, for the most part she is deaf: for she many times stops wool into her ears to keep out the cold.
I hear that Wits Cabal is removing out of Cupids Court into Hymens prison, and there to be bound in bonds of Matrimony.
Faith I pity the Cabal, and condemn their Wit, by reason it did not keep them out of slavery.
Wit is both a Pander and a Traitor: for Wit is a Pimp in Cu∣pids Court, and betrays his Court to Hymens Prison.
There are no prisoners look so dejectedly as Hymens prisoners.
There is great reason for it: for they are almost starved for want of variety, and they have less liberty than other prisoners have.
You hear of the great Marriages that are concluded on, and they are to be dispatched out of hand.
Hear of them (say you) I must stop my Ears, and shut my Eyes, if I did not both hear and see their preparations: for all the Tradesmen are so busily employed, as if they were never to sell or work more after these Ma∣riages.
What Tradesmen are those?
Why Taylors, Shoemakers, Hosiers, Seamstresses, Feather-men, Periwig-makers, Perfumers, Clothiers, Linnengers, Silk men, Mercers, Mil∣leners, Haberdashers, Curlers, Spurriers, Sadlers, Coach-makers, Uphol∣storers, besides Confectioners, Cooks, Bakers, Brewers, Butchers, Poulterers, and twenty more I cannot think of.
They will kill and destroy so many creatures for their Feasts, that they will make a massacre.
A Famine I think:
But there will be great dancings at the Court they say: for three will be Masks, Plays, Balls, and such braveries as never was.
These public Weddings, and such public Revellings, put the Gentry to more charges, than many times they are able to spare; which if it were not for Revelling, there would be no need of such vain and idle Ex∣pence.
I mean to be at some charges, as to make me a new Suit or two of Clothes.
Faith I will spare my purse, and stay at home.
Where will you keep your Wedding-Feast?
We will keep ours at the Court.
So will we.
And so will we.
And so will we.
If you please, Mistress, we will keep ours in the Country.
I approve of it.
If my Mistress agree, we will keep ours at the Play-house, and feast and dance upon the Stage.
I agree and approve of your Choice.
An Ordinary, or Tavern, is a more commodious place for the Society of the Wits: for I am sure all the Wits will meet there.
But if an Ordinary, or Tavern, be more commodious, yet they are not so public places as the Theaters of Players; so that Wits may be merrier and freer in a Tavern, but not so divulged as on a Stage in a Play-House.
The truth is, an Ordinary or Tavern is a more proper place for Monsieur Sensuality and his Mistress to keep their Wedding-Feast, than for Monsieur Satirical and his Mistress.
By your favour, the most proper place for us is the Court.
I think that an Hospitable Gentleman's House in the Country, is most proper for Monsieur Sensuality to keep his Wedding-Feast in.
That is a more proper place for Liberty and Wanton.
Nay, by your favour, another House (which shall be nameless, for fear of offending) is fitter for them.
My Honey sweet Love, where shall we keep our Wedding-Feast?
For your sake, my Sugar-sweeting, we will keep it in Bedlam, and Monsieur Busy and his Bride shall keep us company.
Thou art a very wag, my Love.
W' are all agreed.
Pray Jove we speed.

A Tragedy I usher in to day,
All Mirth is banished in this Serious Play;
Yet sad Contentment may She to you bring,
In pleased Expressions of each several thing.
Our Poetress is confident, no Fears,
Though against her Sex the Tragic Buskins wears,
But you will like it, some few hours spent,
She'll know your Censure by your hands what's meant.
Since we are come out of our own Country to travel, we will go into Turkey, if you will, and see that Coun∣try.
With all my heart; but now I think on it better, I will stay here a while longer for the Courtesans sake; for we shall never get such store, nor such choice of Mistresses; there∣fore, though the sober and chaste women are kept up here in Italy, yet the wild and wanton are let loose to take their liberty: But in Turkey, that barb∣rous Country, all are kept close, those that will, as well as those that will not; but if they had the custom of Italy, to keep up only their honest women, it were a Charity: for otherwise a man loses his time in Courting those wo∣men that will not accept of his love: for how should a man know whether women will, or will not, having all sober faces, and demure countenances, coy carriages, and denying words?
But yet they consent at last: for Importunity and Opportunity, it is said, wins the chastest •he.
Faith all the flowery Rhetoric, and the most observing times, and fittest opportunities, and counterfeiting dyings, win nothing upon a cold Icy Constitution, or an obstinate Morality; it is true, it may work some good of∣fact upon an Icy Conscience.
From whence comes that Letter?.
From France Sir I believe, from your Father.
What News? Hath thy Father sent thee money?
Yes, but it is to return home: for he hath sent me word my Sister is married to a very rich, honest, and sweet-natur'd man; and that also he would have me come home to marry a rich Heir, one that is his Neighbours Daughter: for my Father says he desires to see me settled in the World be∣fore he dies, having but us two, my Sister and I.
Why, is he sick, that he talks of dying?
No, but he is old, and that is more certain of Deaths approach.
But is your sister married, say you?
Yes.
Faith I am sorry for it: for I thought to have married her myself.
Marry she would have had but a wilde Husband, if she had mar∣ry'd you.
The thoughts of this Rich Heir, make thee speak most precisely, as if thou were the most temperate man in the world, when there is none so deboist as thou art.
Prithee hold thy tongue, for I am very discreet.
Yes, to hide thy faults, to dissemble thy passions, and to compass thy desires; but not to abate any of them: Well, if thy sister had not been married, I would have praised thee, but now I will rail against thee: for lo∣sers may have leave to talk.
Why, what hopes could you have had to marry her?
Why, I was thy Friend, and that was hope enough. But is thy sister so handsome as Fame reports her?
I cannot tell; for I never saw her since I was a little boy, and she a very child, I being kept strictly at School, and from thence to the University: And when I was to travel, I went home, but then she was at an Ants house a hundred miles from my Fathers house, so as I saw her not; but I must leave off this discourse, unless you'll return into France with me.
No faith, thou shalt return without me: for I will not go so soon, unless my Friends had provided me a rich Heiress to welcome me home; but since they have not, I mean to stay and entertain my self and time with the plump Venetians.
Fare thee well Friend, and take heed you entertain not a disease.
Thou speak as if thou were a Convertito.
You are always at work, for what use is it? You spend more money in silk, cruel, thread, and the like, than all your work is worth.
I am now making you bands.
Pray let my bands alone: for I'm sure they will be so ill-favour'd as I cannot wear them.
Do not condemn them before you have tried them.
You may make them; but I we will never wear them.
Well, I will not make them, since you dislike it.
Come, will you go to the Gaming-house?
What to do?
To play at Cards, or the like Games.
I will never play at such Games but with women.
Why so?
Because they are Effeminate Pastimes; and not manly Actions; neither will I merely rely upon Fortunes favour without merit, as Game∣sters do.
Why then will you go to a Tavern?
For what?
To drink.
I am not thirsty.
But I would have you drink until you are thirsty.
That's to drink drunk.
And that's that I desire to be.
What?
Why drunk.
So do not I: for I will not wilfully make my self incapable, as I can neither be able to serve my King, Country, nor Friend, nor defend my Honour: for when I am drunk, I can do neither; for a man drunk, I weak∣er than a child that hath not strength to go or stand; and is worse than those that are dumb, for the dumb keep silence, when those that are drunk, doe stutter and stammer out non-sense, and make themselves fools; besides, e∣very Coward will take courage to beat, at least affront a man that is drunk, when as he dares not look issue, or come near him without respect, when he is sober.
Come, come, thou shalt go, if it be but to decide our drunken quarrels, and allay the wrathful vapour of Bacchus.
No, I will never decide the disputes of Fool, Mad-men, Drun∣kards, nor Women: for Fools understand no Reason, Mad-men have lost their Reason, Drunkards will hear no Reason, and Women are not capable of Reason.
Why are women not capable of Reason?
Because it is thought, or rather believed, that women have no ra∣tional souls, being created out of man, and not from Jove, as man was.
If Jove hath not given them rational fouls, I am sure Nature hath given them beautiful bodies, with which Jove is enamoured, or else the Po∣ets lye.
Poets describe Jove according to their own passions, and after their own appetites.
Poets are Ioves Priests.
And Natures Panders.
Well, if you will neither go to the Gaming-house, Tavern, nor Bawdy-house, will you go and visit the sociable Virgins.
Yes, I like sociable Virginity very well. But pray what are those
sociable Virgins, which you would have me go to see?
Why a company of young Ladies that meet every day to dis∣course and talk, to examine, censure, and judge of every body, and of every thing.
It is pity, if they have not learned the rules of Logic, if they talk so much, that they may talk sense.
I will assure you they have voluble Tongues, and quick VVits.
Let us go then.
Lord, how ill-favour'd you are dressed to day!
Why I am cleanly.
You had need be so: for if you were ill-favour'dly dressed and sluttish too, it were not to be endured.
Well Husband, I will strive to be more fashionably dressed.
Well Son, but that you are as a stranger, having not seen you in a long time, I would otherwise have chid you for spending so much since you went to travel.
Sir, travelling is chargeable, especially when a man goes to in∣form himself of the Fashions, Manners, Customs, and Countries he travel∣leth through.
Look you Son, I have increased my Family since you went from home, your Sisters Beauty hath got me another Son.
And I make no question but my Brothers noble and gallant Actions will get you another Daughter.
Well Son, I must have you make haste and marry, that you may give me some Grand-children to uphold my Posterity, for I have but you two; and your sister, I hope, will bring me a Grand-son soon: for her Maids say she is sick a mornings, which is a good sign she is breeding, al∣though she will not confess it: for young married Wives are ashamed to con∣fess when they are with Child, they keep it as private, as if their Child were unlawfully begotten.
Me thinks my Brother doth something resemble my Wife.
No sure, Brother, so rude a made face as mine, can never resem∣ble so well a shaped face as my sisters.
I believe the Venetian Ladies had a better opinion of your face and person than you deliver of your self.
My Brother cannot choose but be weary, coming so long a Journey to day: wherefore it were fit we should leave him to pull off his boots.
Son, now I think of't, I doubt you are grown so tender since you went into Italy, as you can hardly endure your boots to be roughly pulled off.
I am very sound Sir, and in very good health.
Art thou so? Come thy ways then.
Wife, I have some occasion to sell some Land, and I have none that is so convenient to sell as your Jointure.
All my Friends will condemn me for a fool, if I should part with my Jointure.
Why then you will not part with it?
I do not say so: for I think you so honest a man, that if you should die before me, as Heaven forbid you should.
Nay leave your prayers.
Well Husband; you shall have my Jointure
If I shall, go fetch it.
Surely Husband, I deserve a kiss for it.
I cannot stay to kiss.
Madam, what will you have for your supper: for I hear my Master doth not sup at home.
Any thing Ione, a little Ponado, or Water-gruel.
Your Ladyships Diet is not costly.
It satisfies Nature as well as costly Olio's or Becks; and I desire only to feed my Hunger, not my Gusto: for I am neither gluttonous nor lickerish.
No, I'll be sworn are you not.
Come Ladies, what discourse shall we have to day?
Let us sit and rail against men.
I know young Ladies love men too well to rail against them; besides, men always praise the Effeminate Sex, and will you rail at those that praise you?
Though men praise us before our faces, they rail at us behind our backs.
That's when you are unkind, or cruel.
No, it is when we have been too kind, and they have taken a surfeit of our company.
Indeed an over-plus of Kindness, will soon surfeit a mans Af∣fection.
Wherefore I hate them, and resolve to live a single life; and so much I hate men, that if the power of Alexander and Caesar were joined into one Army, and the courage of Achilles and Hector were joined into one Heart, and the wisdom of Solomon and Ulysses into one Brain, and the Aloe∣quince of Tully and Demosthenes into one Tongue, and this all in one man, and had this man the Beauty of Narcissus, and the youth of Atones, and would marry me, I would not marry him.
Lady, let me tell you, the Youth and Beauty would tempt you much.
You are deceived: for if I would marry, I would sooner marry one that were in years: for it were better to choose grave Age, than fantastical Youth; but howsoever, I will never marry: for those that are unmarried, appear like birds, full of life and spirit; but those that are married, appear like beasts, dull and heavy, especially married men.
Men never appear like beasts, but when women make them so.
They deserve to be made beasts, when they strive to make wo∣men fools.
Nay, they rather think us fools, than make us so: for most Husbands think, when their Wives are good and obedient, that they are simple.
When I am married, I'll never give my Husband cause to think me simple for my obedience: for I will be cross enough.
That's the best way: for Husbands think a cross and contradicting Wife is witty; a hold and commanding Wife, of a heroic spirit; a subtle and crafty Wife to be wise, a prodigal Wife to be generous, a false Wife to be beautiful: And for those good qualities he loves her best, otherwise he hates her; nay, the falser she is, the fonder he is of her.
Nay, by your favour, for the most part, Wives are so enslaved, as they dare not look upon any man but their Husbands.
What better object can a woman have than her Husband?
By your leave, Matron, one object is tiresome to view often, when variety of objects are very pleasing and delightful: for variety of obe∣jests clear the senses, and refresh the mind, when only one object dulls both
sense and mind, that makes married wives so sad and melancholy, when they keep no other company but their Husbands; and in truth they have reason: for a Husband is a surfeit to the Eyes, which causes a loathing dislike unto the mind; and the truth is, that variety is the life and delight of Natures works, and Women being the only Daughters of Nature, and not the Sons of Jove, as men are feigned to be, are more pleased with variety, than men are.
Which is no honour to the Effeminate Sex; but I perceive, Lady, you are a right begotten daughter of Nature, and will follow the steps of your Mother.
Yes, or else I should be unnatural, which I will never be.
Sir, I wonder, since my sister is so handsome, that you did not marry her more to her advantage.
Why Son, I think I have married her very well for your advantage: for her beauty was her only Portion, and she is married to a noble Gentle∣man who hath a very great Estate.
But Sir, her beauty doth deserve a King, nay an Emperor, a Cae∣sar of the World.
O Son, you are young, which makes you partial on your sisters side.
It's a strange forgetfulness not to come near me in two hours, but let me sit without a fire: if you were my Mistress, I should make a con∣science to be more diligent than you are, if I did take wages for my service as you do.
If you do not like me, take another.
If you be weary of my service, pray change; perchance you may get a better Mistress, and I hope I shall get as careful a servant.
I would have all women bred to manage Civil Affairs, and men to manage the Military, both by Sea and Land; also women to follow all Manufactures at home, and the men all Affairs that are abroad; likewise all Arts of Labour, the men to be employed in, and for all Arts of Curiosity, the women.
Nay certainly, if women were employed in the Affairs of State, the World would live more happily.
So they were employed in those things or business that were pro∣per for their strength and capacity.
Let me tell you, Ladies, women have no more capacity than what is as thin as a Cobweb-la•n, which every eye may see through, even those that are weak and half blind.
Why we are not Fools, we are capable of Knowledge, we on∣lie want Experience and Education, to make us as wise as men.
But women are incapable of public Employments.
Some, we will grant are, so are some men: for some are nei∣there made by Heaven, Nature, nor Education, sit to be States-men.
And Education is the chief: for Lawyers and Divines can no∣ver be good States-men, they are too learned to be wise; they may be good Orators, but never subtle Counsellors; they are better Disputers than Conui∣verse; they are fitter for Faction than Reformation; the one make quarrels, or upholds quarrels, the other raises doubts: But good States-men are bred in Courts, Camps, and Cities, and not in Schools and Closets, at Bars and in Pulpits; and women are bred in Courts and Cities, they only want the Camp to give them the perfect State-breeding.
Certainly, if we had that breeding, and did govern, we should govern the world better than it is.
Yes, for it cannot be governed worse than it is: for the whole World is together by the Ears, all up in Wars and Blood, which shows there is a general defect in the Rulers and Governors thereof.
Indeed the State-Counsellers in this Age have more Formality than Policy, and Princes more plausible words, than rewardable deeds; in∣so much as they are like Fiddlers, that play Artificially and Skilfully, yet it is but a sound which they make and give, and not real presences.
You say true; and as there is no Prince that hath had the like good fortune as Alexander and Caesar, so none have had the like Generosities as they had, which shows, as if Fortune (when she dealt in good earnest, and not in mockery) measured her gifts by the largeness of the Heart, and the li∣berality of the hand of those she gave to: And as for the death of those two Worthies, she had no hand in them, nor was she any way guilty there∣of: for the Gods distribute life and death without the help of Fortune.
It is strange, Ladies, to hear how you talk without knowledge, neither is it fit for such young Ladies as you are to talk of State-matters; leave this discourse to the Autumnal of your Sex, or old Court-Ladies, who take upon them to know every thing, although they understand nothing. But
your Discourses should be of Masks, Plays, and Balls, and such like Recrea∣tions, fit for your Youth and Beauties.
What's the reason you turn away Nan?
Why she turns away me: for she is more willing to be gone, than I to have her go.
It is a strange humour in you, as never to be pleased: for you are always quarrelling with your servants.
Truly I do not remember that ever I had a dispute or quarrel with any servant since I was your Wife, before this with your Maid Nan; and to prove it, is, that I do not speak many words in a whole day.
Those you speak, it seems, are sharp.
Let it be as you say: for I will not contradict you.
Well, then take notice I will not have Nan turned away.
I am glad she pleases you so well, and sorry I can please you no better.
She is very handsome, extreme handsome, beyond all the women that ever Nature made. O that she were not my sister!
I doubt, Brother, I have surprised you with my sudden coming in, for you start.
Your Beauty, Sister, will not only surprise, but astonish any man that looks thereon.
You have used your self so much to dissembling Courtships since you went into Italy, as you cannot forbear using them to your sister: But pray leave off that unnecessary civility to me, and let us talk familiarly, as brothers and sisters use to do.
With all my heart, as familiarly as you please.
Pray Brother tell me; if the women in Italy be handsome, and what Fashions they have, and how they are behaved.
To tell you in short, they are so Artify'd, as a man cannot tell when∣there they are naturally handsome, or not: As for their Behaviour, they are very Modest, Grave, and Ceremonious, in public and in private, confident, kind, and free, after an humble and insinuating manner: they are bred to all Virtues, especially to dance, sing, and play on Musical Instruments: they are
naturally crafty, deceitful, false, covetous, luxurious, and amorous; they love their pleasures better than Heaven: As for their fashion of garments, they change as most Nations do, as one while in one, and then in another: As for their Houses, they are furnished richly, and themselves adorned cost∣lie when they keep at home in their houses: for they dress themselves finest when they entertain strangers or acquaintance; but this Relation is only of the Courtesans: As for those that are kept honest, I can give little or no ac∣count: for they are so enclosed with locks and bolts, and only look through a jealousy, so as a stranger cannot obtain a sight, much less an acquaintance.
Then they have not that liberty we French women have.
O no.
Why, do they fear they would all turn Courtesans if they should be left to themselves?
The men are jealous, and will not put it to the trial: for though they are all Merchants, even the Princes themselves, yet they will not ven∣ture their wives.
I would not live there for all the World, for to be so restrained: for it is said, that Italian men are so jealous of their wives, as they are jea∣lous of their Brothers, Fathers, and Sons.
They are so: for they are wise, and know Nature made all in com∣mon, and to a general use: for particular Laws were made by Men, not by Nature.
They were made by the Gods, Brother.
What Gods Sister, old men with long beards?
Fie, fie, Brother, you are grown so wild in Italy, as France, I doubt, will hardly reclaim you; but I hope when you are married, you will be re∣formed, and grow sober.
Why Sister, are you become more sober or reformed since you are married?
No Brother, I never was wild nor wanton, but always modest and honest.
Faith Sister, me thinks you might have been married more to your advantage than you are, had not my Father been so hasty, in marrying you so young.
Why do you say so Brother, when the man I'm married to is so worthy a person as I do not merit him? neither would I change him for all the World.
Nay Sister, be not angry: for it is my extreme love, having no more sisters but you, that makes me speak.
Prithee Brother do not think I am angry: so I believe it proceeds from love, and that it is your affection that makes you so ambitious for me.
Know Sister, I love you so well, and so much, as it is a torment to be out of your company.
Thank you Brother, and know I desire never to be in any other Company than my Husband, Father, and Brother, nay any other company is troublesome.
Ladies, how are your wits to day?
Faith my brain is like Salisbury Plain to day, where my thoughts run Races, having nothing to hinder their way, and my brain, like Salisbury-plain, is so hard, as my thoughts, like the horses heels, leave no print behind, so as I have no wit to day: for Wit is the print and mark of thoughts.
And I am sick to day, and sickness breaks the strings of Wit; and when the strings are broke, no harmony can be made.
It is with Wits as it is with Beauties, they have their good days, as to speak quick, and to look well, to look cloudy, and to speak dully; and though my tongue to day is apt to run like an Alarm clock, without any in∣termission, yet my mind being out of order, my tongue will go out of time, as either too fast or too slow, so as none can tell the true time of sense.
For my part I am so dull to day, as my Wit is buried in stupi∣ditty, and I would not willingly speak, unless my speech could work upon e∣very passion in the heart, and every thought in the head.
For my part, if any can take delight in my unfolded tongue and unpolished words my discourse is at their service.
Me thinks, Ladies, your Wits run nimbly, fly high, and spread far; wherefore make a witty match, or a match of Eloquence.
With all my heart: for in the Combat of Eloquence I shall do like to a valiunt man in a battle; for though he wins not the Victory, yet he proves not a Coward; so though I should not get the victory of Wit or E∣loquence, yet I shall not prove my self a fool.
I will make no such match: for though I have read some few books, yet I have not studied Logic nor Rhetoric, to place and set words in order; and though I have read History, and such like books, yet I have not got their Speeches by heart, nor parts of them, as the parts of one Orate∣on, and a part of another Oration, and of three or four to make up an Orate∣on of my own, as all Orators do now adays; neither have I studied the Mo∣rals, or the Fathers, so much as to have their sayings and sentences to stuff my Discourse as Preachers do, and to speak a natural way, although extra∣ordinary witty, as to have their Orations as full of wit as of words, yet it would be condemned if the Speaker is not learned, or that their Speeches ex∣press not learning.
Now you talk of Speeches and Orations, it seems very strange to me to read the Speeches that Chronologers write down to be truly rela∣ted, as from the mouths of those that spoke them, especially such as are spo∣ken ex tempore, and on a sudden; but more especially those that are spoken in Mutinies, and to a tumultuous multitude, wherein is nothing but distra∣ction, both in the Speakers and Hearers, frights and fears in Opposers and Assaulters: As for Example; when Tacitus set down the Speeches of some persons at such times, when and where, every one is in such fears and decor∣ders, as there seemed to be not any one person that could have the leisure, time, rest, or silence, to get those Speeches by heart, to bear them away in
their memory, or had they Place, Time, Ink, Pen, or Paper, to write them down.
But the Speeches that Thucidides sets down, may be better credi∣ted, because most of them were premeditated, and soberly, orderly, and quietly delivered, which might more easily be noted, and exactly taken to deliver to posterity.
Another thing is, how Tacitus could come to know the particu∣lars and private speeches betwixt man and man, as Friend and Friend, Bro∣there and Brother; and not only the Speeches of the Roman Nations, of which he might be best informed, but the Speeches of persons of other Na∣tions, whose Language was not easily understood, or frequent amongst the Romans; nay not only so, but he hath writ the thoughts of some Comman∣ders and others.
Lady, you must not be so strict in History, as to have every word true: for it is a good History, if the sense, matter, manner, form, and actions be true: As for Example; Say a man should be presented all naked, is he less a man for being naked? or is he more a man for being clothed, or for being clothed after another Fashion than his own? So a History is not the less true, if the Actions, Occasions, Forms, and the like be related, although every word be not expressed as they were; so that Tacitus's Speeches may be true, as to the sense, although he should express them after his manner, fan∣cy, wit, or judgment. Thus the body or subject of those Speeches might be true, only the dress is new.
But by your leave, let me tell you, that Chronologers do not only new dress truth, but falsify her, as may be seen in our later Chronologers, such Writers as Camden, and the like: for they have written not only partially, but falsely: As for particular Families some Camden hath mistaken, and some of Ancient Descent he hath not mentioned, and some he hath falsely mentioned, to their prejudice, and some so slightly, as with an undervaluing, as if they were not worth the mention, which is far worse than if he should rail or dis∣claim against them: But I suppose he hath done as I have heard a Tale of one of his like Profession, which was a Schoolmaster, as Camden was, which went to whip one of his Scholars, and the boy to save himself, promised his Master, that if he would give him his pardon, that his Mother should give him a fat pig; whereupon the fury of the Pedant was not only pacified, but the boy was stroked, and made much of; so it is to be observed, that most Schoolmasters commend those of their scholars most, as to be the most apt and ingenious to their learning, although mere dunces, whose Parents and Friends fee or bribe them most, which causes them both to flatter their scho∣lars and their parents: So Camden, to follow the practice of his Profession, hath sweetened his pen as towards his scholars and their families; and it is likely most towards those scholars that were more beneficial to him; but to such persons whose parents had Tutors for them at home, not suffering them to go to common Schools, he hath passed over, or lightly mentioned their Families, or hath dipped his pen in vinegar and gall.
Nay faith is is likelier that he might take some pett at those that did not entertain him at their Houses when he went his Progress about the Kingdom to inform him of the several parts of the Country, before he writ of the same.
I observed one Error in his Writing, that is, when he mentions such Places and Houses, he says, the ancient situation of such a worthy Fa∣mily,
when to my knowledge, many of those Families he mentions, bought those Houses and Lands, some one Descent, some two Descents, some three before, which Families came out of other parts of the Kingdom, or the Ci∣tie, and not to the Ancient and Inheritary Families; but he leaves those An∣tient Families unmentioned.
Perchance he thought it fit, that those Famllies that were so ill Husbands, or had so ill fortunes, as they were forced to sell their Ancient In∣heritance, their memories should be buried in their ruins.
What say you of the Chronologer of the Gods and gallant He∣roes, which was Homer?
I say he was a better Poet than an Historian.
Why Homers Works are only a Poetical History, which is a Romance: for Romance Writers heighten natural actions beyond natural power, as to describe by their wit impossible things, yet to make them sound or seem probable.
Nay faith, impossible can never be described to be probable.
I am sure Homer was our, or else Noble Persons were not so well bred in his time as they are now in our time; as when he makes them miscall one another, giving one another ill rames when they me• to sight, as dog, and the like names; when in these our days; when Noble persons meet to fight, they bring Complements in their mouths, and Death in their hands, so as they strive as much in Civility as Courage; indeed true Va∣lore is Courage.
If you condemn Homer for making men to speak so, you may condemn him much more for making the Gods to speak after that manner: for he hath made the Gods to speak so, as to call one another dogs, and the like names.
The truth is, Homer, as excellent a Poet as he is famed to be, yet he hath not fitted his terms of Language proper to those he makes to speak, or the behaviour of those persons he presents, proper to their Dignities nor Qualities: for, as you say, he makes the Gods in their contentions and fights not only to speak like mortals, but like rude-bred, ill-natured Clowns, and to behave themselves like rude, barbarous, brutish and cruel men, when he should have made the Gods to have spoken the most Eloquentest of Humane Language, and after the most El•gent manner, by reason Eloquence hath a Divine Attraction, and Elegance a Divine Grace.
For my part, I can never read Homer upon a full stomach: for if I do, I am sick to hear him describe their broiled, roast, and boiled meats.
For my part I can read him at no time: for my stomach is al∣ways so weak, or at least nice, as the discourse of the large Thighs or Chines of Beef and Mutton, with their larded fat, suffocates my spirits, and makes me ready to swoon: for the discourse makes me imagine I smell the strong savour of the gross meats, and the drunken savour of wine.
They had meat fit for soldiers, and not Ladies.
I hope their Concubines, that lay in their Tents, had finer meats, or else they would appear foul pursy sluts.
Why, if they were, they would be handsome enough to serve those slovenly Heroes.
Why do you call those great and brave Heroes slovens?
Because they killed and dressed their own meat, and there are no
such greasy fellows as Butchers and Cooks, and therefore must needs stink most horribly.
It was a sign they had excellent stomachs in Homers days.
It was a sign Homer had a good hungry stomach himself, that he could talk so often and long of meat.
Let me tell you, Ladies, it was a sign those persons in those times were Hospitable and Noble Entertainers; but in these times the No∣bler sort are too curious and delicate.
I have observed that one pen may blur a Reputation; but one pen will hardly glorify a Reputation.
No; for to glorify, requires many pens and witnesses, and all little enough.
It is neither here nor there for that: for merit will get truth to speak for her in Fems Palace; and those that have none, can never get in, or at least to remain there: For have not some Writers spoke well of Narrow, and strived to have glorified him, who was the wickedst of all the Empe∣rours? And have not some Writers done the like for Claudius, who was the foolishest of all the Emperors? yet they were never the more esteemed in the House of Fame. And have not some Writers writ ill, and have indea∣vour'd to blot and blur the Renowns of Iulius Caesar, and Angustus Caesar, and of Alexander, and yet they are never the worse esteemed in the House of Fame; but Heroic Actions, and wise Governors, force pens, although pens cannot force swords.
By your favour, but pens and prints force swords sometimes, nay for the most part: for do not books of Controversies, or engraving; or printed Laws, make Enemies, and such Enemies, as to pursue with fire and sword to death?
Well, for my part I do not believe it was the glory of Victory, and conquering the most part of the World, which made Alexander and Caesar to be so much reverenced, admired, and renowned by those following Ages; but that their Heroic Actions were seconded with their generous deeds, distributing their good fortune to the most deserving and meritorious persons in their Parties.
You say true; and as there have been none so Heroical since their deaths, so there have been none so Generous.
Ladies, by your leave you are unlearned, otherwise you would find that there have been Princes since their times, as Heroical and Generous as they were.
No, no, there have been none that had so noble souls as they had: for Princes since their days have been ruled, checked and awed by their petty Favourites; witness many of the Roman Emperors, and others, when they ruled and checked all the World.
Indeed Princes are not so severe, nor do they carry that State and Majesty as those in former times: for they neglect that Ceremony now adays, which Ceremony creates Majesty, and gives them a Divine Splendour: for the truth is, Ceremony makes them as Gods, when the want thereof makes them appear as ordinary men.
It must needs: for when Princes throw off Ceremony, they throw off Royalty; for Ceremony makes a King like a God.
Then if I were a King, or had a Royal Power, I would create such Ceremonies, as I would be Deified, and so worshipped, adored, and prayed to whilst I live.
So would I, rather than to be Sainted or prayed to when I were dead.
Why, Ceremony will make you as a God, both alive and dead, when without Ceremony you will not be so much as Sainted.
I had as lieve be a Saint as a God: for I shall have as many pray∣ers offered to me, as if I were made a God.
Come, come, Ladies, you talk like young Ladies, you know not what.
Lord Madam, I wonder at your patience, that you can let Nan, not only be in the house, and let my Master lie with her, for she is more in my Masters chamber than in yours, but to let her triumph and domineer, to command all as chief Mistress, not only the servants, but your self, as you are come to be at her allowance.
How should I help it?
Why if it were to me, I would ring my Husband such a•peal, as I would make him weary of his wench, or his life.
Yes, so I may disquiet my self, but not mend my Husband: for men that love variety, are not to be altered, neither with compliance or crossness.
It is true, if he would, or did love variety; but he only loves Nan, a Wench which hath neither the Wit, Beauty, nor good Nature of your Ladyship.
I thank you Join for your commendations.
But many times a good-natured Wife will make an ill-natured Hus∣band:
That's when men are fools, and want the wit and judgment to va∣lue worth and merit, or not to understand it.
Why then my Master is one; but why will you be so good as to spoil your Husband? for in my conscience, if you were worse, he would be better.
The reason is, that Self-love hath the first place, and therefore I will not dishonour my self, to mend or reform my Husband; for every one is only to give account to Heaven, and to the World, of their own actions, and not of any others actions, unless it be for a witness.
Then I perceive you will not turn away this Wench.
It is not in my power.
Try whether it be or not.
No, I will not venture at it, lest I and my Maid should be the pub∣lick discourse of the Town.
Why, if she should have the better, yet the Town will pity you, and condemn my Master, and that will be some comfort.
No truly: for I had rather be buried in silent misery, and to be for∣gotten of mankind, than to live to be pitied.
Then I would, if I were you, make him a scorn to all the World, by cuckolding him.
Heaven forbid that I should stain that which gave me a Repu∣tion, my Birth, and Family, or defame my self, or trouble my conscience, by turning a whore for revenge.
Well, if you saw that which I did see, you would hate him so, as you would study a revenge.
What was that?
Why, when you came into my Masters Chamber to see him when he was sick of the French Pox, I think you chanced to taste of his broth that stood upon his Table; and when you were gone, he commanded Nan to fling that broth out which you had tasted, and to put in fresh into the porrin∣ger to drink.
That's nothing: for many cannot endure to have their pottage blown upon.
It was not so with him: for he, before he drank the fresh broth, Nan blew it, and blew it, and tasted it again and again, to try the heat, and ano∣there time to try if it were salt enough, and he seemed to like it the better; besides, he was never quiet whilst you were in the Chamber, until you went out; he snapped you up at every word; and if you did but touch any thing that was in the Chamber, he bid you let it alone, and at last he bid you go to your own Chamber, and seemed well pleased when you were gone.
Alas, those that are sick, are always froward and peevish; but pre∣thee Join have more Charity to judge for the best, and have less passion for me.
Come Ladies, what will you discourse of too day?
Of Nature.
No, that is too vast a Subject to be discoursed of: for the Theme being infinite, your discourse will have no end.
You are mistaken: for Nature lives in a quiet Mind, feeds in a generous Heart, dresses in a Poetical Head, and sleeps in a dull Under∣standing.
Natures Flowers are Poets Fancies, and Natures Gardens are Poetical Heads.
Pray leave her in her Garden, and talk of something else.
Then let us talk of Thoughts: for thoughts are the children of the Mind, begot betwixt the Soul and Senses.
And Thoughts are several Companions, and like Courtly
Servitors, do lead and usher the Mind into several places.
Pray stay the Discourse of Thoughts• for it's a dull Dis∣course.
Then let us talk of Reason.
Why should we talk of Reason, when there are so many seem∣ing reasons, as the right cannot be known?
Seeming reasons are like seducing flatterers, persuade it is truth, when all is false they say.
Let us talk of Justice.
Justice, to the Generality, hath a broad full face; but to parti∣culars, she hath but a quarter and half-quarter face; and to some particu∣lars, she veils it all over: Wherefore to talk of Justice, is to talk blind∣fold.
Let us talk of Bashfulness.
What, should we talk of our own disgrace?
A Grace you mean, Lady.
No surely, a distempered Countenance, and a distorted Face, can be no grace.
Let us talk of the Passions.
It is easier to talk of them, than to conquer and govern them, al∣though it is easier to conquer the perturbed passions of the Mind, than the un∣ruly Appetites of the Body: for as the Body is grosser than the Soul, so the Appetites are stronger than the Passions.
Let us talk of Gifts.
There are no Gifts worth the talking of, but Natural Gifts, as Beauty, Wit, good Nature, and the like.
Let us talk of Wit, that is a Natural Gift.
Nature gives true Wit to very few: for many that are account∣ed Wits, are but Wit-leeches, that suck and swell with wit of other men, and when they are over-gorg'd, they spue it out again; besides, there are none but Natural Poets that have variety of Discourses, all others talk accor∣ding to their Professions, Practice, and Studies, when Poets talk of all that Nature makes, or Art invents, and like as Bees that gather the sweets of e∣very flower, bring honey to the Hive, which are the Ears of the Hearers, wherein Wit doth swarm: But since we are not by Nature so endued, Wit is a subject not fit to be pursued by us.
Let us talk of Beauty.
Those that have it, take greater pleasure in the Fame, than in the Possession: for they care not so much to talk of it, as to hear the prai∣ses of it.
Come Ladies, let us go: for I perceive your Wits can settle up∣on no one subject this day.
O how my Spirit moves with a disordered haste! my thoughts tu∣multuously together throng, striving to pull down Reason from his throne, and banish Conscience from the Soul,
What Son, Lover-like already, before you have seen your Mistress? Well, her Father and I am agreed, there's nothing wanting but the Priest and Ceremony, and all is done.
Sir, there are our Affections wanting; for we never saw one a∣another: Wherefore it is not known whether we shall affect or nor.
I hope you are not so disobedient, to dispute your Fathers will.
And I hope, Sir, you will not be so unkind, as to force me to mar∣rye one I cannot love.
Not love? why she is the richest Heiress in the Kingdom.
I am not covetous, Sir, I had rather please my Fancy, than increase my Estate.
Your Fancy? Let me tell you, that your fancy is a fool; and if you do not obey my will, I will dis-inherit you.
I fear not poverty.
Nor fear you not a Fathers curse?
Yes Sir, that I do.
Why then be sure you shall have it, if you refuse her.
Pray give me some time to consider of't.
Pray do, and consider wisely, you had best.
I doubt my Lady will die.
I fear so: for the Doctor, when he felt her pulse, shook his head, which was an ill sign.
It is a high Fever she is in.
The Doctor says a high continual Fever.
She's a fine young Lady, it is pity she should die.
My Master puts on a sad face; but yet me thinks his sadness doth not appear of a through-die.
Come Ladies, how will you pass your time to day?
Pray let us sit and Rhyme, and those that are out, shall lose a Collation to the rest of the Society.
Agree, agreed.
Love is both kind and cruel,
As fire unto fuel;
It doth embrace and burn,
Gives Life, and proves Deaths Urn.
A lowering Sky and Sunny wrays,
Is like a commendation with dispraise;
Or like to Cypress bound to Bays,
Or like to tears on Wedding days.
A flattering Tongue, and a false Heart,
A kind Embrace which makes me start,
A beauteous Form, a Soul that's evil,
Is like an Angel, but a Devil.
A woman old to have an Amorous passion,
A Puritan in a fantastic Fashion,
A formal States-man which dances and skips about,
And a bold fellow which is of countenance out.
A Scholars head with old dead Authors full,
For want of wit is made a very gull.
To laugh and cry, to mingle smiles and tears;
Is like to hopes and doubts, and joys and fears:
As several passions mixes in one mind,
So several postures in one face may find.
To love and hate both at one time,
And in one person both to join,
To love the man, but hate the crime,
Is like to sugar put to brine.
Ladies, you had better tell some Tales to pass your time with: for your Rhymes are not full of wit enough to be delightfully sociable.
Agreed, let us tell some Tales.
Once upon a time Honour made Love to Virtue, a gallant and Heroic Lord he was, and she a sweet, modest, and beautiful Lady, and na∣ked Truth was the Confident to them both, which carried and brought love messages and presents from and to each other.
Out upon beastly truth: for if she goes naked, I dare say she is a wanton Wench, and Virtue, I dare swear, is little better than her self, if she keeps her company, or can behold her without winking; and I shall shrewdly suspect you, Ladies, to be like her, if you discourse of her; but more, if you have any acquaintance with her: And since you are so wilde and wanton, as to talk of naked truth, I will leave you to your scurtilous dis∣course: for I am ashamed to be in your company, and to hear you speak such Ribaldry: O sie, O sie, naked Truth! Jove bless me, and keep me
from naked Truth, as also from her sly Companion Virtue, out upon them both.
Now you have seen your Mistress, Brother, tell me how you like her.
It were a rudeness to your Sex, if I should say I dislike any Woman.
Surely Brother you cannot dislike her: for she is handsome, well-behav'd, well-bred, a great Estate, and of a good Fame and Family.
And may she have a Husband answerable.
Why so she will, when she marries you.
I cannot equal her Virtues, nor merit her Beauty; wherefore I will not injure her with marriage.
Will you not marry her?
No.
I hope you speak not in Earnest.
In truth Sister I do no not jest.
Prithee Brother do not tell my Father so: for if you do, he will be in such a fury, as there will be no pacifying him.
If you desire it, I will not.
First reason with your self, and try if you can persuade your Af∣fections.
Affections, Sister, can neither be persuaded either from or to: for if they could, I would employ all the Rhetoric I have to persuade them. O sister!
Where is your Brother?
He is even now gone from hence.
How chance he is not gone to his Mistress?
I know not Sir; but he looks as if he were not very well.
Not well? he's a foolish young man, and one that hath had his li∣bertie so much, as he hates to be tied in wedlocks Bonds; but I will go rat∣tle him.
Pray Sir persuade him by degrees, and be not too violent at first with him.
By the Mass Girl thou• give me good counsel, and I will temper him gently,
O she's dead, she's dead, the sweetest Lady in the World she was.
O she was a sweet-natur'd creature: for she would never speak to any of us all, although we were her own servants, but with the greatest civility; as pray do such a thing, or call such a one, or give or fetch me such or such a thing, as all her servants loved her so well, as they would have laid down their lives for her sake, unless it were her Maid Nan.
Well, I say no more, but pray God Nan hath not given her a Spanish Fig!
Why, if she did, there is none of us knows so much, as we can come as Witnesses against her.
It is a strange negligence, that you stand prating here, and do not go to help to lay my Lady forth.
My Master weeps, I did not think he had loved my Lady so well.
Pish, that's nothing: for most love the dead better than the living; and many will hate a friend when they are living, and love them when they are dead.
Brother, why weep you?
O Sister, Mortality spouts tears through my eyes, to quench Loves raging fire that's in my Heart! But twill not do, the more I strive, with greater fury doth it burn.
Dear Brother, if you be in love, she must be a cruel woman that will deny you: for pure and virtuous love softens the hardest hearts, and melts them into pity.
Would I were turned to stone, and made a marble Tomb, where∣in lies nothing but cold death, rather than live tormented thus.
Heaven keep my fears from proving true.
Daughter, how do you like Monsieur Frere?
Sir, I like whatsoever you approve of.
But setting aside your dutiful Answer to me, tell me how you af∣fact him?
If I must confess, Sir, I never saw any man I could love but him.
You have reason: for he is a fine Gentleman; and those Mari∣ages most commonly prove happy, when Children and Parents agree.
But Sir, he doth not appear to fancy me so much, or so well as I fancy him.
It's a sign, Child, thou art in Love, that you begin to have doubts.
No Sir, but if I thought he could not love me, I would take off that Affection I have placed on him whilst I can master it, lest it should grow so strong as to become masterless.
Fear not Child.
It is said that Malateste is a Widower.
Why then there is a Husband for me.
Why for you? he may choose any of us as soon as you, for any thing you know.
I'm sure we are as fair.
And have as great Portions.
And are as well bred as you are.
Well, I know he is allotted to my share.
Pray do not fall out about him: for surely he will have none of you all, for it is said he shall marry his Maid.
Why he is not so mad: for though his Maid served to vex and grieve his wife into her grave, and also to pass away idle hours with him, yet he will not marry her, I dare warrant you; for those that are married, must take such as they can get, having no liberty to choose, but when they are free from wedlocks bonds, they may have choice.
So Sir, you are welcome, for you can resolve a question that is in dispute amongst us.
What is it Lady?
The question is, whether you will marry your Maid or not.
No sure, I cannot forget my self, nor my dead wife so much, as to marry my Maid.
Faith that is some kindness in Husbands, that they will remem∣ber their wives when they are dead, although they forget them whilst they live.
A good wife cannot be forgotten neither dead nor alive.
By your favour, Sir, a bad wife will remain longest in the me∣mori of her Husband, because she vexed him most.
In my Conscience, Lady, you will make a good wife.
If you think so, you had best try.
Shall I be accepted Lady?
I know no reason I should refuse Sir; for Report says you have a great Estate, and I see you are a handsome man; and as for your nature and disposition, let it be as bad as it can be, mine shall match it.
My Nature loves a free spirit.
And mine loves no restraint.
Lady, for this time I shall kiss your hands, and if you will give me leave, I shall visit you at your lodging.
You shall be welcome Sir.
Ladies, did not I tell you I should have him?
Jesting and Raillery doth not always make up a Match.
Well, well, Ladies, God be with you, for I must go home and provide for my Wedding: for I perceive it will be done on the sudden; for Widowers are more hasty to marry, than Bachelors, and Widows, than maids.
Stay Lady, you must first get the good will of your Parents.
All parents good will concerning Marriage, is got before hand, without speaking; if the Suitor be rich, and if he prove a good Husband, then Parents brag to their acquaintance, saying, How well they have matched their Child! making their acquaintance believe it was their prudence and industry that made the match, when the young couple were agreed before their parents ever knew or guessed at such a match; but if they prove un∣happy, then they complain to their acquaintance, and shake their heads, cry∣ing, it was their own doings, saying their children were wilful, and would not be ruled, although they forced them to marry by threatenings and cursings. O the unjust partiality of self-love, even in parents, which will not allow right to their own own branches! But I forget my self. Farewell, farewell.
Bid us to your Wedding, bid us to your Wedding.
Why do you follow me, with sighs fetched deep, and groans that seem to rend your heart in two?
Be not offended: Sisters should not be so unnatural, as to be weary of a Brothers company, or angry at their grief; but rather strive to ease the sorrow of their hearts, than load on more with their unkindness.
Heaven knows, Brother, that if my life could ease your grief, I will∣lingly would yield it up to death.
O Gods, O Gods, you cruel Gods, commanding Nature to give us Appetites, then starve us with your Laws, decree our ruin and our fall, create us only to be tormented!
I dare not ask his griefs, or search his heart, for fear that I should find that which I would not know.
My Master and our new Lady are coming home; wherefore you must get the House very clean and fine: You Wardropian; you must lay the best Carpets on the Table, and set out the best Chairs &amp; Stools; and in the Chamber wherein my Master and Lady must lie, you must set up the Cross-stitch bed, and hang up the new suit of Hangings, wherein is the sto∣rye of Abraham and Sarah, and Hagar her Maid. And you Pantlor, must have a care that the glasses be well washed, and that the Basin and Yewer, Voider and Plates be bright scoured, as also the silver Cistern, and the silver Flagons standing therein, and to have a care that the Table-cloaths be smooth, and the Napkins finely knip'd and perfumed, and that the Lemons, Oranges, Bread, Salt, Forks, Knives, and Glasses, be set and placed after the newest Mode.
O Mistress Nan, you have prevented me: for I was going to seek you out, to let you know my Master and our new Lady will be here before night; wherefore you must see that the Linen be fine, and the Sheets be
well dried and warmed, and that there be in my Ladies Chamber all things necessary.
Let her command one of her own maids: for I am none of her servant.
Why, whose servant are you?
My Masters, who hired me, and pays me my wages: I never saw her, nor she me.
But all my Masters servants are my Ladies: for Man and Wife divide not their servants, as to say, those are mine, these are yours.
Why, I'm sure in my other Ladies time, all the servants were my Masters, and none my Ladies: for she had not power to take or turn away any one.
The more was the pity; for she was both virtuous and wise: Besides, beautiful and well-bred, rich and honourably born, and of a sweet disposition. But it is said this Lady hath such a spirit, as she will share in the Rule and Government.
Yes, yes, for a little time, as long as Honey-moneth lasts: I dare warrant you she shall reign nor rule no longer.
Come my friends and fellow-servants, let's every one about our several Affairs.
Dear Brother, why do you kneel and weep to me? Frere My tears, like as distressed Petitioners, fall to the ground, and at your feet crave mercy: it is not life they ask, but love that they would have.
Why so you have: for I do vow to Heaven I love you better than ambitious men love power, or those that are vain-glorious love a Fame, bet∣la than the body loves health, or the life loves peace.
Yet still you love me not as I would have you love.
Why how would you have me love?
As Husbands love their Wives, or Wives their Husbands.
Why so I do.
And will you lie with me?
How! would you have me commit Incest?
Sister, follow not those foolish binding Laws which frozen men have made, but follow Natures Laws, whose Freedom gives a Liberty to all.
Heaven bless your soul: for sure you are possessed with some strange wicked spirit, that uses not to wander amongst men.
Sister, be not deceived with empty words, and vainer tales, made only at the first to keep the ignorant vulgar sort in awe, whose Faith, like to their greedy Appetites, take whatsoever is offered, be it ne'er so bad or ill to their stomachs, they never consider, but think all good they can get down;
so whatsoever they hear, they think it is true, although they have no reason or possibility for it.
But learned and knowing men, wise and judicious men, holy and good men, know this you ask is wicked.
They do not know it, but they believe as they are taught: for what is taught men in their Childhood, grows strong in their Manhood; and as they grow in years, so grow they up in Superstition. Thus wise men are deceived and cozened by length of time, taking an old forgotten deed to be a true sealed bond: wherefore, dear Sister, your Principles are false, and there∣fore your Doctrine cannot be true.
Heaven hath taught that Doctrine; wherefore we cannot err.
Heaven considers us no more than beasts, that freely live toge∣there.
O that I should live to know my only Brother turn from man to beast!
I am glad the Ice is broke, and that her fury rages not like fire.
Daughter, I do perceive that Monsieur Frere doth neglect you; besides, he is a wilde debauched young man, and no ways likely to make a good Husband: wherefore I charge you on my blessing, and the duty you owe me, to draw off those affections you have placed upon him.
Good Sir do not impose that on my duty which I cannot obey: for I can sooner draw the light from the Sun, or the World from its Center, or the fixed Stars from their assigned places, than draw away love from him.
Why, how if he will not have you?
I can only say I shall be unhappy.
I hope you will be wiser than to make your self miserable for one you cannot have to be your Husband.
Heaven give your Worship joy, and our noble Lady.
What, is this your best House?
Yes, and is it not a good one Sweet?
Fie upon it, I hate such an old-fashiond House; wherefore pray pull it down, and build another more fashionable, as that there may be a Bell-view and Pergalus round the outside of the Horse, also Arched Gates, Pillars and Pilasters, and carved Frontispieces, with Antic Imagery, also I would have all the lower rooms vaulted, and the upper rooms flat-roof'd, painted and gilded, and the Planchers checkered and inlaid with sell∣ver, the Stair-cafe to be large and winding, the steps broad and low, as shall∣low; then to take in two or three Fields about your House to make large Gardens, wherein you may plant Groves of Myrtle; as also to make Walks of green Turf, and those to be hanging and shelving, as if they hung by Goo∣metry; also Fountains and Water-works, and those Water-works to imi∣tate those Birds in Winter, that only sing in Summer.
But this will cost a great sum of money Wise.
That's true, Husband; but to what use is money, unless to spend?
But it ought to be spent prudently.
Prudently, say you? why Prudence and Temperance are the Executioners of Pleasure, and Murderers of Delight: wherefore I hate them, as also this covetous humour of yours.
I marry Sir, here is a Lady indeed: for she talks of pulling down this House before she hath thoroughly seen it, and of building up a∣another.
If you will have my opinion, the old servants must go down as well as the old house.
I believe so: for she looked very scornfully upon us, nor spoke not one word either good or bad to us.
Well, come let us go about our employments, and please as long as we can, and when we can please no longer, we must seek other Ser∣vices.
Do not pursue such horrid Acts, as to Whore your Si∣ster, Cuckold your Brother-in-Law, dishonour your Father, and brand your life and memory with black infamy. Good Brother consider what a world of misery you strive to bring upon your self and me.
Dear Sister pity me, and let a Brothers pleading move your heart, and bury not my youth in Death before the natural time.
It is better you should die, and in the grave be laid, than live to damn your soul.
To kill my self will be as bad a crime.
O no: for Death any way is more honourable than such a life as you would live.
FRiend, prithee tell me why you do not marry.
Because I can find no woman so exact as I would have a Wife to be: for first I would not have a very tall woman, for the ap∣pears as if her soul and body were mis-match'd, as to have a pygmy soul, and a gyantly body.
Perchance her soul is answerable to her body.
O no: for it is a question whether women have souls or no; but for certain, if they have, they are of a dwarfish kind: Neither would I have a wife with a masculine strength; for it seems pra•posterous to the softness and tenderness of their Sex: neither would I have lean wife; for she will appear always to me like the picture of Death, had she but a since and hour-glass in her hand: for though we are taught to have always Death in our Mind, to remember our End, yet I would not have Death always before my Eyes, to be afraid of my End: But to have a very lean wife, were to have Death in my Arms, as much as in my Eyes, and my Bed would be as my Grave.
Your Bed would be a warm Grave.
Why man, though Death is cold, the Grave is hot: for the Earth hath heat, though Death hath none.
What say you to a fat woman?
I say a fat woman is a bed-fellow only for the Winter, and not for the Summer; and I would have such a woman for my Wife, as might be a nightly companion all the year.
I hope you would not make your Wife such a constant bed-fel∣low, as to lie always together in one bed.
Why not?
Because a mans stomach or belly may ache, which will make wind work, and the rumbling wind may decrease love, and so your wife may dis∣like you, and dislike in time may make a Cuckold.
By your favour it increases Matrimonial Love: it is true, it may decrease Amorous Love; and the more Amorous Love increases, the more danger a man is in: for Amorous Love, even to Husbands, is dangerous; for that kind of Love takes delight to progress about, when Matrimonial Love is constant, and considers Nature as it is: Besides, a good Wife will not dislike that in her Husband, which she is subject to her self; but howso∣ever I will never marry, unless I can get such a Wife as is attended by Virtue, directed by Truth, instructed by Age, on honest grounds, and honourable principles, which Wife will neither dislike me, nor I her, but the more we are together, the better we shall love, and live as a married pair ought to live, and not as dissembling Lovers, as most married couples do.
What think you of choosing a Wife amongst the Sociable Virgins?
No, no, I will choose none of them; for they are too full of dis∣course: for I would have a Wife rather to have a listening Ear, than a talking Tongue; for by the Ear she may receive wise instructions, and so learn to practise that which is noble and good; also to know my desires, as to obey my will; when by speaking muck, she may express her self a fool: for great Talkers are not the wisest Practisers: Besides, her restless Tongue will disturb my Contemplations, the Tranquillity of my Mind, and the peace, quiet, and rest of my Life.
Are you she that takes upon you to govern, and to be Mistress in this House?
Why I do but that I did in the other Ladies time.
Let me tell you, you shall not do so in my time; nay you shall have no doings, wherefore get you out of the House.
I will not go.
No? but you shall.
Go you and call one of those servants I brought with me.
Here take this wench, and put her out of the Gates.
You Rogue, touch me and you dare, I shall have one to de∣fend me.
I desie your Champion.
What you Villain, will you force her? set her down.
I did no more than what I was commanded.
Who commanded you?
My Lady, Sir, commanded me to carry her out of the gates.
Pray let her alone until I have spoke with my wife.
I shall Sir.
VVhat's the matter Nan?
Only my Ladies dislikes of my person: for it could not be through any neglect of my service, or faithful diligence, or humble duty, but through a passionate humour, because she hath heard you were pleased heretofore to favour me.
But now we are very honest Nan.
Yes, the more unkind man you, to win a young Maid to love, and then to turn her away in disgrace.
I do not turn you away.
Yes but you do, if you suffer my Lady to turn me away.
How should I help that? for she hath such a strong spirit, as not to be controlled.
O Sir, if you bridle her, you may guide her as you will.
How should I bridle her?
Why put her to her allowance, and take the government of your Family out of her hands, as you did to your former Lady.
My other wife was born with a quiet obedient nature, and this with a high and turbulent nature; and if I should cross her high working spy¦rit, she would grow mad.
Why then you would have a good excuse to tie her up.
Her Friends would never suffer me; besides, the world would condemn me, and account me a Tyrant.
Why it is better to be accounted a Tyrant than a Fool.
O no; for men ought to be sweet and gentle-natur'd to the Effeminate Sex.
I see by you; that the worse that men are used, the better Husbands they make: for you were both unkind and cruel to your other Lady, nei∣there could you find, or at least would not give such Arguments for her.
Will you rebuke me for that which you persuaded me unto, by dispraising your Lady unto me?
Alas Sir, I was so fond of your company, that I was jealous even of my Lady, and love is to be pardoned: wherefore, Dear Sir, turn me not away; for Heaven knows I desire to live no longer than when I can have your favour, and I wish I were blind, if I might not be where I may see you, and my heart leaps for joy, whenever I hear your voice: wherefore good Sir, for loves sake pity me.
Well, I will speak to my wife for you.
Well, if I can but get my Master but dance once, to kiss me again,
which I will be industrious for, I will be revenged of this domineering Lady: I hope I shall be too crafty for her.
Brother, speak no more upon so bad a subject, for fear I wish you dumb: for the very breath that's sent forth with your words, will blister both my ears: I would willingly hide your faults, nay I am ashamed to make them known; but if you do persist, by Heaven I will discover your wicked desires, both to my Father and Husband.
Will you so?
Yes that I will.
Well, I will leave you, and try if Reason can conquer your evil de∣sires, or else I'll die.
Heaven pour some holy Balsam into your festered soul.
Wife, I am come an humble Petitioner to you in the be∣half of Nan, she hath been a servant here ever since I was first married to my other Wife.
No, no, Husband, I will have none of your whores in the house where I live; if you must have whores, go seek them abroad.
Pray let not your jealous Passion turn away a good servant.
Had you rather please your servant, a whore, or me?
Why you.
Then turn her away.
But surely Wife you will let me have so much power, as to keep an old servant.
No Husband, if your old servant be a young lusty wench.
But I have passed my word that she shall stay.
And I have sworn an Oath that she shall go away.
But my promise must be kept: wherefore she shall not go away.
I say she shall go away; nay more, I will have her whipped at the end of a Cart, and then sent out of doors.
As I am Master, I will command none shall touch her; and let me see who dares touch her.
Who dares touch her? why I can hire poor fellows for money, not only to whip her, but murder you.
Are you so free with my Estate? I will discharge you of that Of∣fice of keeping my money.
If you do, I have Youth and Beauty, that will hite me Revengers, and get me Champions.
Will you so?
Yes, or any thing rather than want my will; and know, I per∣fectly hate you, for taking my Maids part against me.
Nay prithee Wife be not so choleric: for I said all this but to try thee.
You shall prove me, Husband, before I have done.
Shall I divulge my Brothers Crimes, which are such Crimes as will set a mark of Infamy upon my Family and Race for ever? or shall I let Vice run without restraint? or shall I prove false to my Husbands bed, to save my brothers life? or shall I damn my Soul and his, to satisfy his wilde desires? O no, we both will die, to save our Souls, and keep our Honours clear.
The more I struggle with my Affections, the weaker do I grow for to resist. If Gods had power, they sure would give me strength, or were they just, they would exact no more than I could pay; and if they cannot help, or will not help me, Furies rise up from the infernal deep, and give my Actions aid; Devils assist me, and I will learn you to be more evil than you are; and when my black horrid designs are fully finished, then take my soul, which is the quintessence of wickedness, and squeeze some venom forth up∣on the World, that may infect mankind with plagues of sins
There multitudes will bury mine,
Or count me as a Saint, and offer at my Shrine.
Nan, you must be contented, for you must be gone: for your Lady will not suffer you to be in the house.
Will you visit me, if I should live near your House, at the next Town?
No: for that will cause a parting betwixt my Wife and me, which I would not have for all the World: wherefore Nan, God be with you.
May your House be your Hell, and your Wife be your Devil.
What will your Ladyship have for your Supper?
Whatsoever is rare and costly
Did your Ladyship send for me?
Yes: for you having been an old servant in my Fathers House, will be more diligent to observe and obey my commands: where∣fore go to the Metropolitan City, and there try all those that trade in vani∣ties, and see if they will give me credit, in case my Husband should restrain his purse from me, and tell them that they may may make my Husband pay my debts. The next is, I would have you take me a fine house in the City: for I intend to live there, and not in this dull place, where I see no body but my Husband, who spends his time in sneaking after his Maids tails, having no other employment; besides, solitariness begets melancholy, and melan∣choly begets suspicion, and suspicion jealousy; so that my Husband grows amorous with idleness, and jealous with melancholy. Thus he hath the plea∣sure of variety, and I the pain of jealousy: wherefore be you industrious to obey my command.
I shall Madam.
Good Sir conceal my Passion, left it become a scorn, when once it is known: for all rejected Lovers are despised, and those that have some small returns of Love; yet do those saint Affections triumph vaingloriously upon those that are strong, and make them as their slaves.
Surely Child thy Affections shall not be divulged by me, I only wish thy Passions were as silent in thy breast, as on my tongue, as that he thou love so much may lie as dead and buried in thy memory.
There's no way to bury Love, unless it buries me.
I hear Wife that you are going to the Metropolitan City.
Yes Husband: for I find my self much troubled with the Spleen, and therefore I go to try if I can be cured.
Why, will the City cure the Spleen?
Yes, for it is the only remedy: for melancholy must be diverted with divertisements; besides, there are the best Physicians.
I will send for some of the best and most famous Physicians from thence, if you will stay.
By mo means: for they will exact so much upon your impor∣tance, as they will cost more money than their journey is worth.
But Wife, it is my delight and profit to live in the Country; besides, I hate the City.
And I hate the Country.
But every good Wife ought to conform her self to her Hus∣bands humours and will.
But Husband, I profess my self no good Wife: wherefore I will follow my own humour.
I find there is no crossing her, she will have her Will.
Wife, I am come to rob your Cabinet of all the Ri∣bands that are in it: for I have made a running match betwixt Monsieur la Whips Nag, and your Brothers Barb; and he faith that he shall not run, unless you give him Ribands: for he is persuaded your Favours will make him win.
Those Ribands I have, you shall have, Husband: But what will my Brother say if his Barb should lose the match?
I asked him that question, and he answered, that if he lost, he would knock his Barbs brains out of his head.
Where is my Brother?
Why he is with your Father, and such a good companion he is to day, and so merry, as your Father is so fond of his company, insomuch as he hangs about his neck as a new-maried wife: But I conceive the chief reason is, that your Brother seems to consent to marry the Lady Amor.
I am glad of that with all my soul.
But he says, if he doth marry her, It must be by your pursue∣sons.
He shall not want persuading, if I can persuade him.
Come Wife, will you give me some Ribands?
Yes Husband, I will go fetch them.
Nay Wife, I will go along with you.
Thoughts, cease to move, and let my Soul take rest, or let the damps of grief quench out lifes flame.
My dear Child, do not pine away for Love: for I will get thee a handsomer man than Monsieur Frere.
Sir, I am not so much in love with his person, as to dote so sondly thereon.
What makes you so in love with him then? for you have no great acquaintance with him.
Lovers can seldom give a Reason for their Passion; yet mine grew from your superlative praises; those praises drew my Soul out at my Ears to entertain his love: But since my Soul misles of what it seeks, will not return, but leave my body empty to wander like a ghost, in gloomy sadness, and midnight melancholy.
I did mistake the subject I spoke of, the substance being false, those praises were not current: wherefore lay them aside, and fling them from thee.
I cannot: for they are minted, and have Loves stamp, and being out, increases like to Interest-money, and is become so vast a sum, as I be∣lieve all praises past, present, or what's to come, or can be, are too few for his merits, and too short of his worth.
Rather than praise him, I wish my Tongue had been for ever dumb.
O wish not so, but rather I had been for ever deaf.
My Child is undone.
My Master looks so lean and pale, as I doubt he is in a Con∣sumption.
Faith he takes something to heart, whatsoever it is.
I doubt he is jealous.
He hath reason: for if my Lady doth not cuckold him, yet she gives the World cause to think she doth: for she is never without her Gal∣lants.
There is a great difference betwixt our Lady that is dead, and this.
Is my Wife come home yet?
No Sir.
I think it be about twelve of the Clock.
It is past one Sir.
If it be so late, I will sit up no longer watching for my Wives coming home, but I will go to bed; for I am not very well.
You do not look well, Sir.
Indeed I am sick.
Lord Brother, what is the reason you are come back so soon? Hath not your Barb run the Race?
No.
What makes you here then?
To see you.
To see me? why I shall give you no thanks, because you left my Husband behind you.
I do not come for your thanks, I come to please my self.
Prithee Brother get thee gone: for thy face doth not appear so honest as it uses to do.
I do not know how my Face doth appear; but my Heart is as it was, your faithful Lover.
Heaven forbid you should relapse into your old disease.
Let me tell you, Sister, I am as I was, and was as I am, that is, from the first time I saw you, since I came from Travel, I have been in love with you, and must enjoy you; and if you will embrace my love with a free consent, so, if not, I'll force you to it.
Heaven will never suffer it, but cleave the Earth, and swallow you alive.
I care not, so you be in my Arms; but I will first try Heavens pow∣er, and struggle with the Deities.
Wife, Is this the way to cure melancholy? to sit up all night at Cards, and to lose five hundred pounds at a sitting? or to stay all night abroad a Dancing and Revelling.
O yes; for the Doctors say there is nothing better than good company, to employ the Thoughts with (outward Objects) otherwise the Thoughts feed too much upon the Body; besides, they say that Exercise is excellent good to open Obstructions, and to disperse melancholy Vapour; and the Doctors say, there is no Exercise better than Dancing, because there are a great Company meet together, which adds Pleasure to the La∣bore.
My other Wife did not do thus.
Wherefore she died in her youth with melancholy; but I mean to live while I am old, if mirth and good company will keep me alive; and know I am not so kind-hearted to kill my self, to spare your Purse, or to please your Humour.
Who will call unto the Gods for aid, since they assist not Innocence, nor give protection to a Virtuous Life? Is Piery of no use? or is Hey∣ven so obdurate, no holy prayers can enter Heaven-gates, or penitential tears can move the Gods to pity? But O my sorrows are too big for words, and all actions too little for his punishment.
Sister, I must die, wherefore you must not live: for I cannot be without your company, although in death, and in the silent grave, where no Love's made, nor Passion known.
It's welcome News: for if death comes not by your hand, my hand shall give a passage unto life.
There is none so sit to act that part as I, who am so full of sin, want nothing now but murder to make up measure.
Death, thou are my griefs Reprieve, and wilt unlade my Soul from heavy thoughts that miserable life throws on, and sinks me to the Earth. Brother farewell, may all your crimes be buried in my grave, and may my shame and yours be never known.
Now she is dead, my Mind is at rest, since I know none can enjoy her after me; but I will follow thee: I come, my Mistress, Wife, and Si∣ster all in one.
You Gods of Love, if any Gods there be, O hear my prayer! And as we came both from one Womb, so join our Souls in the Elizium, out Bodies in one Tomb.
Wife, you are very unkind, that you will not come to see me now I am sick, nor so much as send to know how I do.
I am loath to trouble you with unnecessary visits, or impertinent questions.
Is it unnecessary or impertinent to see a Husband when he is sick? or to ask how he doth?
Yes, when their visits and questions can do them no good: But God be with you, for I must be gone.
What, already?
Yes; for I doubt I have staid too long: for I have appointed a meeting, and it will be a dishonour for me to break my word.
But it will be more dishonour to be dancing when your Husband is dying, Lady.
What, will you teach me? go tutor Girls and Boys, and not me.
Let her go, friend: for her anger will disturb me.
I know not what her anger doth you; but her neglect of you doth disturb me: And for my part, I wonder how you can suffer her.
Alas how shall I help, or remedy it? But Heaven is just, and punishes me for the neglect I used towards my first Wife, who was virtuous and kind.
She was a sweet Lady indeed.
O she was! But I Devil as I was, to use her as I did, making her a slave unto my whore and frowns, conjecturing all her Virtues to a con∣trary sense: for I mistook her patience for simplicity, her kindness for wan∣tonness, her thrist for covetousness, her obedience for flattery, her retired life for dull stupidity; and what with the grief to think how ill I used her, and grieving to see how ill this Wife uses me, wasting my Honour and Estate, she hath brought me into a Consumption, as you see: But when I am dead, as I cannot live long, I desire you, who are my Executor, to let me buried in the same Tomb wherein my Wife is laid: for it is a joy to me, to think my dust shall be mixed with her pure ashes: for I had rather be in the grave with my first Wife, than live in a Throne with my second. But I grow very sick, even to death: wherefore let me be removed.
Son-in-law, did your Brother say he was very ill?
He said he had such a pain on his left side, as he could not sit on his horse, but must be forced to return home again.
Heaven bless him: for my heart is so full of fears and doubts, as if it did Prognosticate some great misfortune to me.
Pray Sir be not so dejected, nor look so pale; I dare warrant you the News that his Barb hath won the Race, will be a sufficient Cataplasm to take away his Stitch.
How doth my Son and daughter?
I think they are both well, Sir.
Why, do not you know, and yet dwell in the same House?
No indeed not I: for I only saw my young Master go towards my Ladies lodging, but I did not follow to inquire of their healths, for feat they should be angry, and think me bold.
Where is you Lady?
In her Chamber I think, Sir.
Do you but think so? do you not know? It is a sign you wait not very diligently.
Why Sir, I met my young Master going to his Sisters Chamber, and he sent me on an Errand, and when I came back, the outward doors were locked, so as I could not get in any ways.
The doors locked, say you?
Yes Sir.
Let them be broken open.
O my doubts foretell à miserable Tragedy.
Villains let go, she shall not wander in the silent shades without my company; besides, my soul will crowd through multitudes of souls, that flock to Charons Boat, to make an easy passage for her pure soul: wherefore let go, I command you as being your Master, let go.
This is so strange an Accident, that hardly Story can mention the like.
I wonder how they came murdered, the door being locked, and none but themselves; if it had been thieves, they would have robbed them, as well as murdered them.
I believe my young Master was the Thief that did both rob and murder.
Well, I could tell a story that I heard, listening one day at my Ladies Chamber-door; but I will not.
Prithee tell it us.
No, I will not, you shall excuse me for this time.
Daughter, I am come to bring you a Medicine to take out the sting of Love.
What is it Sir?
Why, Monsieur Frere hath most wickedly killed himself.
Although I cannot usher him to the Grave, I'll follow him.
Help, help, for Heavens sake, help.
O my Child is dead! O she is dead, she is dead! Carry her to her Bed.
O my Lady is quite dead, and past all cure, and her Father, I think, will die also.
I am sure there is a sad, a sad House to day.
IF subtle Air, the Conduit to each ear,
Hearts passion moved to draw a sadder tear
From your squeezed brains, on your pale cheeks to lie,
Distilled from every Fountain of each eye;
Our Poetress hath done her part, and you
To make it sadder, know this Story's true;
A plaudity you'll give, if think it fit,
For none but will say this Play is well writ.

OUr Auth'ress says to make a Play is hard,
To censure freely men are not afraid;
Opinions easily do pass upon
The wit of others, though themselves have none;
And envy rounds the sense, and words about,
Hoping some errors it may soon find out.
But streams of wit do not so often flow,
As salt rough censures, which to billows grow;
And swell so big, till they in pieces fall,
In their own ruins they are buried all.
But if our Authors Play deserves a praise,
She will not thank you, though you give her bays;
Because she knows it is her right and due,
And justice to receive the same from you.
Wherefore she says, if you do take delight
To read her Play, or acted to your sight,
The bounty doth proceed from her alone;
Her wit doth pleasure give to every one.
The Play, if bad, she doth desire no praise,
The Cypress will receive instead of bays.
It is reported that the great Mogul hath War with the Parthians, and a man of our Nation is General of all his Forces.
Me thinks it is too great an Honour and Trust to give to a stranger.
But it is reported he hath behaved himself so wisely, honestly, nobly, and valiantly, as he hath gained the favour of the Emperor, and love of the Soldiers, and also respect from all the infer∣our Princes.
Who should this man be?
I cannot learn: for the Merchants from whom I had this report, know not what his right name is; for they think he goes by a covered name.
Surely he is of a very mean Birth, that he is ashamed to own his name.
It seems so; but let his Birth be poor or great, he hath a Gene∣rous Soul: for they say he is very bountiful, and lives in great magnificence, and carries himself as if he were Princely born: He is the whole discourse upon the Exchange, and the Merchants do cry him up like to another Iuli∣us Caesar.
It seems they fare the better for his being their Countryman, and he to be the Emperors Favourite.
It is like enough.
Nay you may be assured they have a Fee of Obligation, if they praise him so much. Of what Age do they say he may be?
They say is in the prime of his years, a very handsome man, well-behav'd, and of a ready wit.
It is strange it should not be known of what Parentage he is of.
It is not known as yet.
Sir, were not you a servant to the Lord of Sage?
Yes Sir.
He was a Wise, and a Noble Person.
He was so, Heaven rest his Soul.
It is said he hath left but one only Child, and she a Daughter, which Daughter is sole Heir to all his Estate.
She is so.
And it is also reported she will be wooed in public, or else she'll never wed.
The Report is true, Sir: for I am now going to invite all her Friends and acquaintance, to whom she desires to publish her resolutions.
Is she resolved of it?
She hath vowed it.
Pray favour me so much, as to give me a Character of her.
She is Virtuous, Young, Beautiful, Graceful, and hath a superna∣tural Wit; and she hath been bred and brought up to all Virtuosus, which a∣dorns her Natural Gifts; she lives magnificently, yet orders her Estate pru∣dently.
This Lady may be a sample to all her Sex.
Mistress Simple is the very'st Fool that ever I tutored or in∣structed.
Do you mean a fool by imprudence, or a fool that speaks im∣properly?
I do not know what her imprudence may be; but in her words there is no coherence.
Alas she is young; and youth is a Cage of Ignorance, and boys and girls are like birds, which learn from their tutors and tutoresses artifice∣al tunes, which are several Languages, Sciences, Arts, and the like: But the truth is, of all sorts of Birds, the Cocks are more apt to learn than the Hens.
If she can be taught sense, I am much mistaken: for she hath not a reasonable capacity to learn.
Why then she hath a defect in Nature, as a Changeling.
I think so.
Why should you think so, since youths capacity cannot be measured by their Educators? for Time is the only measure of the rational capacity: And to prove it, some boys and girls will be so dull, as to seem stu∣bid to Learning, and yet in their strength of years may prove very rational un∣derstanding,
and wise men or women; besides, the Brain is like to the Air, it is sometimes thick with misty Errors, sometimes dark with clouds of Eg∣norance, and sometimes clear with Understanding, when as the Sun of Know∣ledge shines; and perchance you heard her speak when her Brain was cloud∣die and dark.
So dark, as her words could not find the right way to sense.
Perchance if you hear her speak some other times, when her Brain is clear, you may hear her speak wisely.
It is so unlikely she should ever speak wisely, as it is near to impossible.
Indeed unlikely and impossible do some way resemble each o∣there: But let me tell you, the Brain is like the Face, it hath its good days and its bad: for Beauty and Wit have not only their times and seasons, but their foul and fair days.
You say true: for the choicest Beauties that ever were, or are, will sometimes look worse than at other times; nay so ill they will look some∣times, as they might be thought they were not Beauties.
The like for Wit: for certainly, the greatest Wit that ever was, or is, may sometimes be so dull and unactive, as it might be thought they were so far from being Wits, as they might be judged Fools: And cer∣tainly, the most Eloquent Orators that ever were, have spoke at some times less Eloquently than at other times; insomuch, that at some times, although the subject of their Discourse is so full of Matter and Reason, as might have oiled their Tongues, smoothed their Words, and enlightened their Fancy, yet they will speak as if their Wits had caught cold, and their Tongues had the numb Palsy, on which their words run stumbling out of their mouths as insensible; when as at other times, although the subject of their discourse be barren or boggy, woody or rocky, yet their Wit will run a Race without stop or stay, and is decked and adorned with flowery Rhetoric: And certain∣lie, the wisest men that ever were, have given both themselves and others worse counsel sometimes, than at other times; and certainly the valiantest man that ever was, had sometimes more courage than at other times: But yet although a valiant man may have more courage at one time than another, yet he is at no time a coward, nor a wise man a fool.
But Orators may chance to speak non-sense.
They may so, and many times do.
Why then may not a Valiant man be at some times a Coward, and a Wise man a Fool, as well as Orators to speak non-sense?
Because Valour, Judgment, and Prudence are created in the Soul, and is part of its Essence; I do not mean every soul, but the souls of Valiant and Wise men: for souls differ as much as bodies, some are cry∣ted defective, others perfect; but words are only created in the mouth, and are born through the lips, before the soul of sense is entered or inbodied therein.
An Orators tongue is powerful.
An Orators tongue doth rather play on Passions, than compose the Judgment, or set notes to the Reason; like as a Fiddler, that can play tunes on musical Instruments, but is no Musician, to compose and set tunes: But there are many men that have eloquent tongues, but not witty souls; they have the Art of words, but not the Spirit of wit.
Kind Friends, and worthy Acquaintance, you may think it strange, and perchance take it ill, I invite you only to a simple Dis∣course, for to declare a vain Vow, as you may judge it so to be, which Vow I made since my Father the Lord Sage's death. The Vow is, never to receive a Lovers Address, or to answer a Lovers Suit but in a public Assembly; and it is likely the World will laugh at this as ridiculous, or condemn it for pride, or scorn it as self-conceit: But if they will be pleased to weigh it in Judge∣mints Scales, they will find it poised with a good Intention, and make a just weight of Convenience against unaccustomariness: for though it is not usu∣al, yet it is very requisite, especially to such young women which are Or∣phans, who like small and weak Vessels, that are destitute of Guide or Pilot, are left on the wide Sea-faring World to ruinous waves, and incon∣stant weather; even so young women are to the Appetites of greedy men, and their own inconstant and changing Natures, and want of Experience to guide them, run on Rocks, Shelves, and Quick-sands of Troubles, Misery, and Disgrace, not knowing what safe Port or Home to sail to; whereupon, and in which danger, I considering with my self, at last I thought it the safest way to swim in the full Ocean, and not in the narrow Channels, Creeks, or obscure Corners, lest I should be crushed to pieces, or drowned for want of Sea-room; and surely were there a Law to forbid all private meetings of young men and women, and that no women should marry, unless they be wooed in public, there would not be so many unequal matches, so many perjured Consciences, so many devirginate and forsaken Maids; neither would there be such floods of tears from sorrowful Parents Eyes, for their unduti∣full childrens Actions that will choose without their good liking, and marry against their good wills: But they will be ashamed in public to choose dishonourably or indiscreetly: for the Ears and Eyes of a public Assembly will be as Reigns, to curb their unruly Passions, and their Applause and Com∣mendation will be as spurs to force them to a wise, choice, when in private Wooings their Passions become wilde, and run loosely about, without bridle or check: Wherefore I desire my Friends and Acquaintance to be as wit∣noses of my behaviour and words to my loving and Matrimonial Suitors; and in this you will be as Parents to the Fatherless, as Judges to Pleaders, and Gods to Men.
We approve of your discreet and honest Resolutions, and shall wish you happy days.
Mistress, there is a Woman at the door that can tell Fortunes.
O let her come in, let her come in.
God bless you young Ladies.
Can you tell Fortunes?
Yes that I can Lady.
Tell me mine.
Tell me mine first.
No, tell me mine first.
Nay, tell me mine first.
Have patience Ladies, and let her tell your Fortunes by degrees, one after another: for she cannot tell them all at once.
I must look in your hand, Lady.
By your hand you should marry richly, and keep Open-House; you will have many Children, and your Husband will love you dearly.
But will no body love me but my Husband?
Yes, you will be well beloved, if you be kind and loving to others.
Now tell me my Fortune.
You, Lady, will have two Husbands.
You did not tell me I should have two Husbands.
No Lady, your Fortune is to have but one.
How long will it be ere I shall have one of my Husbands?
Not long, Lady.
Will my Husbands be handsome men?
Your first Husband will be a tall men, with a brown hair and complexion.
That complexion and stature I like very well.
Your second Husband will be of a middle stature, and of a fair hair and complexion.
O I like that stature and complexion better.
Tell me mine, tell me mine.
You will have many courting Servants, and two will fight for you.
And which shall have me?
He that out-lives the other.
Why, shall one of them be killed?
Yes.
I am sorry for that: for I could please them both. But look again, perchance he may be only sore wounded, and not killed out-right.
Your hand doth portend death to one.
And will he live long that I shall marry?
I do not perceive his death in your hand.
I am sorry for that; for I shall not love him, by reason he killed one that loved me so well as to die for my sake.
It is only his fortune to live; but he ventures as much for your sake as the other.
That's all one: for I shall love him that's killed, more than he that lives, especially after I am married: for I shall love a dead servant be∣la than a living Husband.
You are so long a talking to the woman, as you hinder her from tel∣ling me my fortune. Come woman, read the fortune in my hand.
You, Lady, will die a Maid.
Out upon the Witch, what Devil told you that lye?
I do not say you will die a Virgin.
I hope you do not see any children in my hand.
There are many lines that do foretell children; but some are so small, and others so crossed and broke, as I cannot find a strait or perfect line: But here are lines that do foretell many Suitors.
That's some amends: for it had been a hard case, and very ill for∣tune, if I should have neither Husband nor Suitors.
Come, come, Ladies, pay the poor woman, and let her go.
Give her a crown for me.
And one for me.
And one for me.
Heaven bless you Ladies: for you will make me rich.
Give her half a crown for me.
Will not you give her a whole crown?
There is no reason I should: for she hath given me never a Hus∣band.
Well, good woman, let this be a warning to you, that when you come to tell young Ladies their Fortunes, that you be sure to give them all one Husband a piece, if not two or three: for the more Husbands you give them, the more money they will give you.
I shall take your counsel, Mistress.
To die a Maid, it cannot be, it must not be, it shall not be.
Madam, I am come here to offer you a Man, a Gentleman, and a Soldier, three Titles in me, the Person that loves you, honours you, and will serve and obey you, and think it no disgrace thus to alter the Care∣chism of our old written Matrimony: If you command the breeches, you shall not only have them, but the coat too; and when you are pleased to change the name of the Sex, the gray Mare shall be the better Horse: for it is ashame for a man to control a woman, but always to obey and please them from the least to the greatest of their commands: for man never seems so much man, nor masculinely enthroned under the cloth of State, in his Royal Chair of Courage, as when he is taken prisoner, and led captive by the Fe∣male Sex. Thus, fair Divine Lady, conquered, thus I beg, thus I yield, thus submit: Wherefore Lady, take me, and make your self happy and me.
No Musk nor Civet courtly words I use,
Nor Frenchez-pan promises to abuse
Your softer Sex, nor Spanish sweets to tell,
And bribe your quicker nostrils with the smell,
Or let a false tear down my cheek to fall,
And with dissembling kneeling therewithal,
Sigh my self into Air: these fools disdain,
These quarter-wits, O kick them back again:
Nor am I like a Justice of the Peace,
That woo's you just as he would buy a lease;
Nor like an Heir, whose Tutor for his sake
So many lies of Joynter-houses make;
Nor like a Lawyer that would fain entail,
And when he's tried, doth make a Jeofail;
Nay thousands more, that always do dissemble
For your sake, make my loving heart to tremble,
Lest you should be deceived.
Admired Lady, fear not my Profession,
All my Drum-heads, I'll beat them to soft silence,
And every warlike Trumpet shall be dumb:
Our feared Colours now shall be torn off,
And all our Armour be condemned to rust,
Only my Sword I'll wear, the badge of man,
Pore to defend you and your Honour-still.
Then Madam take me thus your loving Vassal,
When lying bragging Castrils will forsake you.
Oh take a man, and joy in him for life,
A Sword-man knows the virtue of a Wife.
Gallant Sir, should I accept of your Suit, I should be ei∣there an Enemy to my self, or you, or my Country: As for my self, should I marry a Soldier, I should be tormented with the cruelest passions: for if I love my Husband, as sure I shall, I shall be perpetually frightened with his dangers, grieved for his absence, despair of his life: Every little misfortune will be as his Passing-Bell; I shall never be at rest asleep nor awake; my Dreams will present him to my view, with bleeding wounds, mangled by∣die, and pale visage; I shall be widowed every minute of an hour, in my own thoughts: for as the Senses are to the Body, so the thoughts are to the Mind, and Imaginations in these, or the like cases, are as strong as a visible presence: for passions live in the Soul, not in the senses; for a man is as much grieve∣ed when he hears his friend is dead or killed, as if he saw him dead or slain: for the dead friend lives in the mind, not the mind in the dead friend: But with these Dreams and Imaginations I shall grow blind with weeping, weak with sighing, sick with sorrowing, and deaf with listening after reports: And should you desist from that noble Profession for my sake, I should prove as a Traitor to my Country, by taking away part of the strength and support, lea∣avenge the weakness to the force of the Enemy: for a good Soldier is a strong Fort and Bulwark of Defence: Indeed a skilful Commander is to be pre∣fer'd before a numerous Army: for a number of men without Order, are like dust, which the least puff of wind blows about; so an Army, not being well commanded, is quickly dispersed, and suddenly routed upon the least error; besides, should you desist, you would bury your name in Oblivion, when by your valiant Actions, and prudent Conduct, your memory will be placed in Fems high Tower, and writ in large Characters of praise. It is true, should I marry, I should prefer my Husbands honour before his life, yet would I not willingly marry a man, whose life shall be set at the stake, and Fortune still throwing at it, for that would make me live miserably: And who would wilfully make themselves miserable, when Nature forbids it, and God commands it not?
Shall we go and visit the Lady Gravity?
No, she lives so solitary a life, as we shall meet no company there: for none go to visit her.
Then let us go to the Lady Liberty, there we shall meet
company enough: for all the Ladies in the Town go to visit her.
If she hath no men-visiters, I will not add to the number of her Lady visitors.
You may be sure she hath Masculine Visitors, or else the Ladies would never go to see her: for it is to meet the men the Ladies go to see her, and not for her own sake.
And the men go to see the Ladies.
I believe some do; yet men are better company in the company of their own Sex, than in the company of women.
By your favour, the contrary Sex agree best, and are better plea∣sed together, than men with men, or women with women: But if the Lady Liberties House be the General Rendezvous for Men and Women, let us go.
Content.
O my dear Heart!
O my dear Joy, how glad am I to see thee! But where have you been, that you came later than you promised? for if you had not sent me word you would come to me to day, I had gone to you.
Why, where do you think I have been?
I know not where to think.
I have been at a Silk-mans shop to buy me a new Gown; but I would not choose it before I had shown thee my patterns.
Let me see them.
What do you think of this stuff?
This is out of Fashion; besides, it is not a Mode-colour.
What think you of this Tabby?
The colour is good, but it is not of a good water.
What think you of this Satin?
The Satin is a good glossy Satin, but the colour is too pale.
But pale colours, it is said, are Allamode in France.
Who says so?
A Gentleman told me so which is newly come out of France.
Then he perchance could have told you all the French Fashions.
So he did most particularly: for he said he went into France for no other purpose but to see and observe Fashions.
I believe he only observed men's Fashions, being a man, and not women's Fashions.
Nay, he swore he observed the women's Fashion more than the men's, by reason he knew it would make him more acceptable to our Sex at his return, not only for Discourse-sake, but for the kind rewards he should have for his Intelligence; which rewards he hath found so full and plentiful, as he hath made such a beneficial Journey, as he will go once every year, and stay a month or two, and then return.
For Ioves sake send him to me.
I will; but prithee choose my Gown.
Let the Gentleman that came out of France choose your Gown: for he can put you into the French Fashion.
Sweet Lady, your Beauty hath wounded my heart, im∣prisoned my senses, and hath enslaved my soul, so as I am wholly in your power.
I will mask my beauty, and set you free.
A mask may shadow your beauty, but cannot extinguish it, no more than a dark cloud can the bright Sun: And as the Sun begets life, and gives light; so your beauty begets love, and gives delight to all that do be∣hold it.
And as Time brings Death, Darkness, and Obscurity; so Age brings wrinkles, and Absence forgetfulness, burying love in the ruins of Beauty.
My love can never die, nor hath time power to vade your beauty.
Nothing escapes Times tyranny, but what the soul possesses.
You are the soul of beauty, and beauty the soul of love.
Such souls have no Eternity, but die as bodies do.
O save my soul, and love me.
It is not in my power: for love is free and resolute; it can nei∣there be commanded nor entreated.
Ladies, you are become melancholy of a sudden: I hope you are not tired with dancing?
Yes saith, we want divertisements: wherefore prethy Sir Tho∣mas Letgo, send for thy affianced Mistress to make sport.
I am ashamed she should be seen, or made known to this noble company.
O divulge her by all means, that the World may know you do despise her, and that you will marry her only because she is rich, and to o∣bay your Fathers commands.
I will obey your commands, and send for her.
Sir Thomas Letgo, your wise Mistress is come to welcome your Guests.
She wants words to express her self, and Wit to entertain them.
Your Father knew you wanted not Wit so much as Wealth.
Many Fathers leave their sons nothing but their follies and vices for their Inheritance: But my Father not having Vices or Follies enough of his own, hath left me another mans Fool for an Annuity.
Is she a fool?
O yes: for she seldom speaks.
That's a great sign of simplicity indeed.
She is a mere Changeling: for when she doth speak, it is but, when she is questioned, and then for the most part she gives but one answer to all sorts of questions.
What Answer is that?
Her Answer is, she cannot tell.
Lady, there may be such questions asked, as are beyond a wise mans understanding to resolve: But perchance she is sceptic, that doubts all things.
What do you judge the scepticks fools?
A man may judge all those to be fools that are not scepticks.
I judge all those that think her not a fool, are fools.
Then Lady I am condemned: for I cannot give sentence against any of your Sex, neither in thoughts or words.
Country Gentleman, Madam, though I no Courtier am by Education,
Yet I more truth may speak, and here declare,
Your charming Eyes turn wanton thoughts to virtue;
Each modest smile converts the sinfull'st soul
To holy Matrimony, and each Grace and Motion,
Takes more than the fairest Face.
I am not young, not yet condemned to age,
Not handsome, nor yet (I think) ill-favour'd;
I do not swell with riches, nor am poor,
No Palaces, yet have Conveniences.
What though Poetic Raptures I do want,
My Judgment's clearer than those hotter brains,
To make a Jointure out of verse and songs,
Or thirds in Oratory to endow you;
The Mean betwixt Extremes is Virtue still:
If so, then make me happy, and your self.
Courtiers may tell you that you may enjoy,
And marry pleasure, there each minutes time,
There is all freedom for the female Sex,
Though you are bound, yet feel not, you are tied,
For liberty begins when you're a Bride:
Your Husband, your Protection, and the Court,
Doth cure all jealousy, and fonder doubts,
Which there are laughed at as the greatest follies,
If not by most, yet they are thought mortal sins:
It is Heaven on Earth for Ladies that seem wise.
But you are virtuous, and those ways despise,
Therefore take me, that honour you for that.
Worthy Sir, could I persuade my Affection to listen to your sure, you should not be denied; but it is deaf or obstinate; it will neither take your counsel, nor be entreated. But since you woo so worthily, I shall esteem you honourable, as well you deserve.
Sweet Madam, I could not pass by your house for my life, but I must enter to see you, although I was here but yesterday.
Dear Madam, I am very much joyed to see you: for I am never well but in your company.
When did you see the Lady Gravity?
I have not seen her these two days.
Lord, she is the strangest Lady that ever I knew in my life, her company is so uneasy, and let me tell you as a secret, she hath a very ill Reputation.
If I thought that, I would not keep her company.
Since I heard that Report, I have shunned her company as much as I could.
Even so will I: for I would not keep any body company that I thought were not chaste for a World. But who is her servant, can you tell?
It is commonly reported Sir Henry Courtly is her servant.
Out upon him, he is the veriest Whoremaster in all the Town; nay, if she keeps him company, I will not come near her, I'll warrant you.
Nor I, although she would fain be dear with me, and seeks all the ways she can to be great with me, sending her Gentleman-Usher every day to me with a How do you.
No, pray do not be dear nor great with her, but let you and I be dear and great, and that will anger her to the heart.
That it will faith, therefore let us go to morrow together and visit her, to let her see how dear and great friends we are.
Content.
Agreed.
Lord, Sir Henry Courtly, I have not seen you these three days.
I was here yesterday, Madam, to wait upon you, but you were abroad, then I went to wait upon you my Lady Parrot, but you were also from home.
So then I had but the reversions of the Lady Minions Visit.
I can be but in one place at one time, Madam.
Why should you take it ill, Madam, that he should visit me first?
Because I know no reason but that he should visit me before you.
Why, my place is before yours.
But the love and esteem I have for him, is to be preferred before your place.
How do you know but that I have as much Affection for him as you have? And I am sure I have, and more.
Don't you believe her, Sir Henry Courtly: for faith she said but even now, that you were the veriest Whoremaster in all the Town, and cried, Out upon you.
And she said she would forbear the Lady Gravitie's company, by reason you did visit her, which was scandalou•.
What, do you betray me in your own house, when you said the same, and if I be not mistaken, before me?
If you tell what I say, I will tell what you say.
Ladies, whatsoever you have said, or will say of me, I shall take it well: for it is an honour to be mentioned by fair Ladies, although in the severest sense or manner, or sharpest words.
What, do you take her part against me?
No, no, I perceive well enough that he takes your part against me, for which he is a most unworthy man.
No, he partially takes your part, which is base.
I will assure you, Ladies, it is not my nature or disposition to de∣light in your displeasures; but my desire is to please all your Sex, and I in∣devour in my practice and behaviour to that end: wherefore, if I cannot please, it is not my fault.
So you make us Women strange creatures, as not to be pleased.
No, Madam, men want those excellent Abilities, or good For∣tunes, which should or could please you.
Faith Madam, he will have much to do to desend himself against us both.
Nay if you will join with me, we shall be too hard for him.
That I will, and help to beat him with Arguments.
For fear I should argue my self more out of your favours than I am already, I will take my leave of your Ladyships for this time.
Lady, you are the Sun of Beauty, from whence all your Sex receive a light, which without that would sit in darkness; you only give them lustre; you are the only Godess men adore, and those men which do not so, if any such men be, they are damned to censure: As for my self, La∣dies have judged me handsome, and for my persons sake have given me fa∣vours; nay, they have wooed my love with great Expenses, maintained my Vanities, and paid my Debts, ruined their own and Husbands Honour and E∣state, and all for love of me; yet do I sue to you with great Humility, though many of your Sex have courted me; and let me tell you, fair Lady, that Courtiers Wives have freer Access to Masks, Plays, Balls, and Courtly Pleasures, than other Ladies have, who beg and strive, and often are beat∣en back in rude disgrace.
All which, fair Lady, if you sum up right,
You'll find a Courtiers Wife hath most delight.
Fair Sir, could Person, Courtship, Garb, or Habit win my love, you should nor could not be denied: But since my Affection is not to be won by any outward Form, or Courtly Grace, I cannot grant your suit; be∣sides, the lives that Courtiers live, agree not with my humour: for I had rather travel to my Grave with ease, than inconveniently Progress about, ti∣ring my body out, lying in nasty lodgings, feeding on ill dressed meat that's got by scrambling; but at the best, a Courtiers life to me is most unpleasant, to sit up late at Masks and Plays, to dance my time away in Balls, to watch for Grace and favour, and receive none; to gape for Preferments, Offices, and Honours, but get none; to waste my Estate with Fees, Gifts, and Braveries, to run in debt prodigally, to receive Courtships privately, to talk loud foo∣lishly, to betray friendship secretly, to profess friendship commonly, to pro∣mise readily, to perform slowly, to slatter grossly, to be affected apishly; no Prudent Brain, or Noble Heart, would interweave the thread of life with such vain Follies, and unnecessary Troubles; besides, I had rather be Mistress of my own House, were it a Cottage poor, than serve the Gods, if Gods were like to men.
My dear Comrade, what think thou? will the Gentleman we met at Madam Gravities lodging marry me, think you?
I know not.
I verily believe he will.
What reason have you to believe he will?
A very good reason, which is, he looked upon me two or three times, and at one time very steadfastly.
If a man should marry all the women he looks on, he will have more Wives than Solomon and the great Turk, adding the number of their Concubines. But the more earnestly the Gentleman looked on you, the gre∣la sign he thought not of you: for thoughts are buried in fixed eyes.
You speak out of spite, because I am thought handsomer than you.
I had rather your Beauty should lie in your own &amp; others thoughts, than it should be visible to the view of the World, or to be inthrown on a multitude of Praises; but howoever, I am not spiteful, and therefore pray think not so for telling you my opinion of your no-lover.
You love your Jest better than your Friend.
That's an old saying; but I love a plain truth better than a flatter∣ing lye.
Madam, Madam, Madam.
Speak Sir, what is it you would say?
Madam, his Love and Modesty doth check his speech.
Then speak you for him.
Madam, your Presence, with you sparkling Eyes,
Hath dazzled him, and struck him dumb with Love;
Like to a bottle too much filled, I doubt,
Though's mouth's turned downward, nothing will come out.
Or like a Bag-pudding in love he's cursed,
So stuffed, so swelled, and yet he cannot burst:
Or like a glass with Spirits of high price,
No drop can fall when it is congealed to Ice.
Sweet Lady thaw him then, take him apart,
And then his Tongue will tell you all his Heart,
And gush it forth with more force far than those
Who dribble all their love away in Prose.
I'm all for Public Wooing, so no stain
Upon my Reputation will remain.
With a dumb Husbands curse I'll ne'er be caught,
But a dumb Wife a blessing may be thought.
And so farewell.
Sir Thomas Letgo's Mistress, that he is to marry, is a pretty Lady.
But I do not perceive he is very hasty to marry her.
If she were mine, I would not prolong my Wedding-day.
For fear she should die, and you should lose her Estate.
No, I am not covetous: for my Estate will maintain a Wife according to my quality, although she bring no Portion; and upon that condition I might have her, I would give a Portion for her, so much I like and fancy her.
And would you marry her if you might have her?
Yes.
Pray tell me, what would you do with a Fool? she would be neither good for Breed nor Conversation: for she might bring you a Race of Fools, and vex you with ignorant Follies.
Why should you think her a Fool? she neither appears fro∣ward, peevish, or spiteful; she hath a sober Face, a bashful Countenance, a natural Garb; she is silent and pensive, which shows she is no Fool; but if she were always laughing, or toying, or singing, or dancing, or simpering, or prating, or had an affected countenance, or affected garbs or postures, I should conclude her to be a Fool. But certainly she must needs have a wise Wit: for she seems melancholy and contemplative, which no fool is; she hears much, and speaks little, which no fool doth: wherefore I judge she hath Wit, but either she is careless, and cares not to express it, or thinks the company fools, and therefore will not express it, or is so bashful, as she can∣not express it; and there is nothing shows, or discovers Wit so much as Bashfulness, which shows the Mind and Thoughts so sensible, as they appre∣hend beyond another perceivance, and so fearful lest they should commit Errors in their Actions and Expressions, as they obscure their Virtues and na∣tural Excellencies, for want of a confident Assurance, and a good Opinion of their own Abilities; besides, Bashfulness thinks the least natural defect
a Crime, and every little error a Disgrace, never to be rubbed out; they will blush at their own thoughts, and will pine almost into a Consumption, if two or three idle words should slip out of their mouths, or that they should mistake an Argument, or that their Behaviour was not so or so: The truth is, they never think their Actions or their Words well enough done or spo∣ken; they are the first that shall condemn themselves, and the last that shall give themselves a pardon: But prithee Ned, as thou art my Friend, see if you can procure me, or watch for an opportunity, that I might speak with her alone.
I think that were not difficult to be done; but I will enquire a way.
Do not forget it.
No, it is so remarkable you should be in love with so simple a creature, as I shall remember it.
Madam, I should not thus presume, did not my Profession dig∣knife me to a Spiritual Office, wherefore a fit Suitor to a Divine Lady: And since my Suit is holy, by reason Marriage is sacred, despise me not.
Worthy Sir, all of your Profession require a solitary Habitati∣on for studious Contemplation to a holy life, wherein their Thoughts are Consecrated to Devotion, that their Doctrine may flow from a pure Mind, in Eloquent words, to the ears of their Flock, to instruct them with the light of Knowledge, and to lead them into the ways of Truth; whereas Marriage, although it be sacred in it self, yet it is rather apt to disturb than unite, espe∣cially a double Marriage, which are of different Natures: for there are two sorts of Marriages, as a Spiritual, and a Corporal: The first is betwixt the Gods and Mankind; the other is betwixt Man and Woman: The one is by a Consecration and Communion of Spirits, the other is by a Com∣bination and Communication of Persons; wherefore those that are married to Jove, ought to keep themselves pure in that Unity: As for the marriage of Combination and Communication of Persons, although it is requisite for the continuance of Mankind, and civil Commonwealths, yet to spiritual Eel∣vations is is a great hinderance: for though a woman, especially a Wife, be accounted as a Helper and Comfort to man by her diligent attendance, and loving service, yet women are accounted not only unprofitable in learned Schools, but obstructers to a studious life, for which women are not suffered to inhabit in Universities, Schools, or Colleges; indeed we are in a manner banished from the sight or entrance thereinto, and men have reason so to do; since learning, especially Divine learning, requires study, and study requires a quiet, solitary, and silent life; and certainly there can be neither solitariness
nor silence where women and children are: for Nature hath made women and children to have restless spirits, unquiet minds, busiless active, and such voluble tongues, as it is impossible they should be silent, whilst life gives them motion; so that a woman is a very unfit companion for Contempla∣tions, wherein there should be no other company but thoughts, which thoughts in a Divine, should be only such as are the Inquirers and Searchers of Ioves divine Mysteries, and Scholars to Ioves divine Schools, and Orators to explain &amp; plead in Ioves divine Laws, and servants to Ioves divine Or∣ders, that they may be Instructors and Intelligencers of Ioves divine Com∣mands: And though women ought to be instructed in Divinity, yet for the most part, women are obstructers and disturbers of Divinity and Divines; besides, the Original Woman was a Tempter to Sin, which all her Effemi∣nate Posterity inherit as a Natural Right and Gift from their great Grand∣mother: And though Divines ought to be industrious to cut off the Entail of that Original Inheritance with their holy Doctrine, quenching the fire of Temptation with the spiritual dew of Divine Instructions, yet ought they not to run themselves into that fire they should quench, serving as fuel to in∣crease it: Wherefore those that dedicate themselves to Ioves Church, ought to live separated from Natures daughters, lest they should yield to hue∣mane frailties, and become slaves to the Effeminate Temptations.
Friend, I am come to ask thy counsel.
Concerning what?
Concerning Marriage.
I will give you the best I can; but it is both difficult and dangerous to give counsel in so weighty a Concernment as Marriage.
You say very true; and being so weighty a Concernment as you say, I am come for thy Advice, not trusting to my own judgment, and thus it is: There is a Gentleman that hath come two or three times thorough out street, and the last time he came, he looked up to my Chamber-window; wherefore I conceive he will come a wooing to me, therefore I desire thee to instruct me how I shall receive his Addresses.
Do you know who he is?
No.
Nor where he dwells?
No.
Nor from whence he came, nor whither he will go?
No.
What makes you think he will be a Suitor to you then?
Because he comes so often thorough our street, and by our door, and hath looked up to my Chamber-window; and these are sufficient Rea∣sons to believe it: for you may be sure he comes thorough our street for my sake.
Truly I know not what counsel to give you; but as occasion shall offer it self, I shall think of you.
Prithee do; but I am in haste, and therefore cannot stay with you any longer: wherefore farewell.
O my sweet Parley, I was told thou were •ot at Home, and I have been at all my Acquaintances Louses to seek thee out, to tell thee a secret.
What secret?
Why there hath been a Gentleman this day at my Fathers house, to Treat with my Father about marrying me; and when I marry, I'll bid thee to my Wedding.
You must bid me before you are married, if you will invite me to your Wedding.
Yes so I will, I'll warrant thee: for I will not forget thee of all my Acquaintance: But prithee tell me what my Wedding-Gown shall be of.
Of white Satin, or cloth of Silver. But of what quality is the per∣son whom you shall marry?
I cannot tell.
What Estate hath he?
I know not.
How often hath he been with your Father?
He never was with my Father before this morning.
Hath your Father concluded the match with him?
I cannot tell.
Hath your Father spoke to you of him?
No.
Then how came you to know he came to Treat of Marriage?
My Fathers man told me he thought the Gentleman came about such a business, because my Father and he were very earnest in their Dis∣course, and in private.
If you know no more, perchance it is about some other bu∣siness.
It cannot be about any thing else, because they were earnest and private.
Perchance it was about borrowing of money, and borrowers use to be earnest, and desire their desires may not be known: wherefore they draw aside, and whisper out their wants.
No, no, I am confident it was about me.
I wish you may do well.
I thank thee for thy good wishes, and I hope he will prove a good Husband.
Madam, although there is a certain and set Form of making Deeds, Wills, and Leafes, and a Form of Marriage, yet I know no cer∣tain nor set form of VVooing, but every one woos after what manner or form he pleases or thinks best, having no set rules to woo by: But I am come here to woo, and so to plead my own cause at the Bar of Affection, and you, as the Judge, are to give the Sentence, and to determine the Suit: But as all other Judges are to be free from partiality, or self-interest, as neither to be oversw•yd with either fear, pity, love, or covetousness, or the like; yet such a Judge as you, and in the like Causes as mine, may have the freedom of partiality or self-interest: wherefore, if no other plea can persuade you, take me for pity: for I am miserably in Love, manacled in Cupids Fetters, bound with his Bow-strings, and wounded with his golden Arrows, from which nothing but your favour and compassionate sentence can release me, otherwise I must lie under the Arrest of a wretched life, till such time as Death set me free, or cast me into Oblivion.
Worthy Sir, as there is no certain nor set form of wooing, so there is no certain nor set form for the wooed to give a direct Answer: And though pity may move a Judge to give a favourable sentence, yet there is no Judge will, or ought to make himself a slave, to set a prisoner free; but if such a chance should be, it must be by a stronger motive or passion than pi∣tie, to make them yield up their liberty: And Marriage is a bondage, especi∣ally when as Sympathy doth not match the pair; and if Cupped hath won∣ded you with his golden Arrows, he hath shot me with those that are head∣ed with lead, from which wounds proceed nothing but cold denials: But howsoever I shall give you part of your desires, which is, I shall pity you, although I cannot persuade my Affections to love you so much as to consent to marry you.
Husband I hear you have a Mistress, but I do not wonder at it, for you have taught me (although not by the former, yet by your present practice) to foresee the future event. First, our loves have grown to their full maturity, and therefore in Nature, as Vegetables, must shed their leaves, or like Animals, at such a growth their strength decays, and in old age dyes; thus we may guess by Natures Revolution, the revolution of our love, though at first we could not dream, but we must discover our dreams to each other, and whatsoever we had heard or seen in each others
absence, when we met, we recounted to each other each object, and repeat∣ed each subject and discourses that our Senses had presented to our know∣ledge; and not only what our Senses had presented, but what our Cons∣caption had conceived, or our Imaginations had created: Also we took de∣light to confer in our Household Affairs, and we were unquiet, uneasy, and restless, until we met, and had discoursed thus unto each other; and if ei∣there of us had been sick, or had perceived the least distemper in each others health, our grief was expressed by our tears, and by our sighs, which from our Hearts did rise, and flowed with grief, which poured through our eyes. But now we begin to cast shadows of dissimulation, which shows our love is in an Eclipse, and from a pretence of the confidence and assurance we have of each other, we begin to be careless of each others discourse or action, giving our selves freedom and liberty to wander, not only from our Home-affairs, but from our professed Affections, to seek for pleasures and delights a∣broad, and only a seeming affection and delight remains at home: And thus by a juggling deceit, and false-glac'd love, we shall in the discovery become enemies, and by a seeming wisdom, we shall become fools, and our follies, as well as our crimes, will destroy the unity of Love, and the peace of Ma∣trimonial Government; And though we should not break out into open War, yet we shall live factious, and our servants will be as Commoners, si∣ding with each Party: But it seems your Mistress hath learned your mind so perfectly, and knows your humour so exactly, and can match your appetites with pleasure so justly, as she hath worked out her designs skilfully, which is, to displace me, and to place her self in your Affections, by which she can make a subtle advantage of your Estate and Fortune, I mean good Fortune: for in bad Fortune she may chance; nay, it is most likely she will desert you for those that will and do forsake Virtue, Chastity, and Honour, are not likely to stick to misfortunes, as to follow Banishment, or to live with Pover∣tie, to bear injury, to endure Scorn, and to die in Misery. True Love may do it; but for those Affections that are produced by Incontinence, and not bound to Honesty, and settled by Constancy, will change more often than the wind, wavering from person to person.
Wife, I confess the Amorous Addresses I have made to other Women; but though I have strayed in my Actions, yet not in my Affecti∣once: for my love is unalterably constant to you, as believing you are unat∣terribly virtuous, and I do not only love your Chastity, prize your Virtue, honour your noble Soul and sweet Disposition, but I take delight in your Wit, am pleased with your Humours, admire your Beauty, and esteem and be∣lieve you to be the most perfect and best of your Sex. But Wife, know, that my Appetites, and not my Affections, seek after variety: for the kissing of a Mistress lessens not the Love to a Wife, but rather increases it, comp∣ring the falseness and beastliness of the one, to the Virtue and Purity of the other.
And shall my Virtue and Chastity be only rewarded with your good Opinion?
Virtue, Wife, is a sufficient Reward in it self, and the Chastity of your Sex is crowned with Honour; but the Reward I give you, is the free use as a Co-partner of my Estate, and the Mistress of my Family: Besides, I make you the chief care of my Industry, the chief subject or object of my Valour, the Treasure of my Life, the only Possessor of my Heart, and for your sake I shall neither refuse Death or Torment. Thus you are the Soul of
my Soul; and since you have my whole soul to you self, you may be well contented to lend my person to your Neighbours Wife, Daughter, Sister, Niece, or Maid.
And will you be contented that I shall likewise borrow of your Neighbour?
No Wife: for you can neither lend nor borrow without the loss of Honour.
Nay, rather than lose so great a loss as Honour, I'll strive to be content, Husband.
Do you so, Wife, and I will strive and endeavour to be contented with my own Wife.
Madam, although I cannot Woo in Eloquent Orations, or Courtly Solicitations, or Learned Definitions, being only bred to In∣industrious actions, thrifty savings, gainful gettings, to enrich me with worldly wealth, and not to studious Contemplations, Poetical Fictions, Divine Eel∣vations, Philosophical Observations, State-Politicians, School-contradicti∣once, Laws Intrications, by which (perchance) I might have gained Fame, but not Wealth: But Fame neither clothes the naked, nor feeds the hungry, nor helps the distressed, neither doth it maintain a Wife in Brave∣rye, where, if you will be mine, you shall sit in a shop all furnished with gold, and great sums shall be brought you for exchange of my Wares; and while you sit in my shop, all street-passengers will stand and gaze on your Beauty, and Customers will increase, and be prodigal to buy, whilst you sell, not for the use of what they buy, but for the delight to buy what you sell; besides, of all saleable curiosities &amp; varieties that are brought to the City, you shall have the first offer, and the first fruits and meats each Season doth pro∣duce, shall be served to your taste; your clothes, though of the City-fashion, yet they shall rich and costly be; besides, to every Feast the City and each Citizen doth make, they will invite you, and place you as their chiefest guest; and when you by your Neighbours doors do pass, their Prentice-boys and Journey-men will leave their shop-boards, and run to view you as you go. Thus shall you live, if you will be mine, in Plenty, Luxury, Pride, and Ease.
Rich Sir, I may sit in your shop, and draw Customers, but shall get no honour by them; I may sell your Wares, but lose my Reputation; I may be adored, worshipped, sought and prayed to, as for and to a Mistress,
but shall never be counted as a Saint; I may be rich in wealth, but poor of the Worlds good Opinion; I may be adorned with silver and gold, but ble∣meshed with censure and slander; I may feed on luxurious Plenty, yet my good name starve for want of a good Fame: for a Citizens Wife is seldom thought chaste, and the men for the most part accounted Cuckolds. I know not whether it be a Judgment from Heaven for their Cozening, or decreed by the Fates for their Covetousness, or bred by a natural Effect of their Lu∣xury, which begets an Appetite to Wantonness; but from what cause so∣ver it comes, so it is: wherefore I will never be a Citizens Wife, though truly I do verily believe there are as many virtuous and chaste women, and understanding men that belong to the City, as in the Country; and were it not for the Citizens wealth, more Ancient Families would be buried in poverty than there hath been, where many times a rich City-widow, or daughter, gives a dead Family a new Resurrection: wherefore, it is more prudent for men to marry into the City, than it is advantageous for women, especially such women that esteem a pure Reputation before wealth, and had rather live in poverty, than be mistrusted for dishonesty.
Madam, although I cannot draw a Line of Pedigree from Gen∣tility, yet I can draw a Line of Peasantry five hundred years in length; and if Antiquity is to be esteemed, my Birth is not to be despised: As for my wealth, I am not poor, but rich for my degree and quality; and though it is not sit I should maintain my Wife in silver and gold, yet I may maintain her with plenty and with store, cloth her in fine smooth soft cloth, spun from the fleeces of my Flocks: But if you will be mine, you shall be crowned with Garlands made of Lilies, Roses, Violets, Pinks, and Daffidillies, and be as Queen of all these Downs, where all the Shepherds and Shepherdesses shall give you homage, and worship you as Godess of the Plains, bringing you Offerings of their mornings Milk, their Butter, Curds, and soft pressed Cheese, and various Fruits fresh gathered off their Trees; also my Kids and Lambs shall sport and play, and taught to know your voice, and to obey, and every Holiday you shall in Arbors sit, shadowed from hot Sun-beams, whilst Country Maids and Country Men which Lovers are, shall dance up∣on the grassy Green to the sound of the Horn-pipe, Bag-pipe, and such brea∣thing Music, whose pleasant Strains, and plain-set Notes, rebound in Echoes from the high-cast Banks, the lofty Hills, hollow Woods, and murmuring Streams, besides other Rural sports, to entertain your Eyes and Ears, and recreate your Mind with Mirth and harmless Plays, to pass your Time withal.
No life so pleasant as the Country Life,
No woman so happy as the Farmers Wife.
Honest Friend, could I as easily persuade my Affections to your Person, as I could to the condition of a Shepherdesses life, or Farmers wife, you should be the only man I would choose; but since I cannot, I must on∣lie return you thanks for your good liking, in that you have preferred me in your choice, for which, may neither nipping Frost, nor burning Sun, nor bla∣sting winds, nor weeds, nor snails, nor worms destroy your Labours, nor ra∣venous
Wolves, nor crafty Foxes nor Polcats, Weasels, Kites, or any such like Vermin, fright or rob you of your young &amp; tender breed; may all your grounds and flocks increase a treble-fold, your fleeces long and thick, your corn firm and full-car'd, your grass sweet and broad-bladed, your trees so full of fruits, that every branch may bow under its load; and may your plen∣tie store all the Kingdom, that neither want nor famine may be feared or felt; may all your Country Neighbours, and labouring Swains, respect you as their Chief, obey you as their Lord, and worship you as their God Pan.
Lady, you are in a serious Contemplation. Pray what are you thinking of?
I have heard that thoughts are free; but I perceive they cannot pass without questioning.
I would not boldly intrude upon them, my humble desire is I might partake of the Excellence of them.
I suppose you think my Contemplation is of Heaven, and not of the World: for there is no subject which can make Thought excellent, but what is Divine: for the World corrupts them, Nature deceives them, and Speech betrays them.
If your speech never betrays more than it doth now, which only expresses your Wit, you may well pardon it; but I now find you are not so ignorantly simple as you are thought to be through your si∣lence.
I confess I have practised silence: for I am of years fitter to learn than to talk; and I had rather be thought ignorantly simple for being silent, than to express folly by too much speaking.
But I wonder you will suffer you self to be laughed at for a Natu∣ral Fool, when your wit is able to defend you from scorns and scoffs, and is able to maintain its own Arguments.
If I had Wit, there would be no Honour in the Arguing, no more than for a Valiant man to fight with Cowards; so wit to dispute with fools: But I had rather they should laugh at me, than I should weep for my self; yet there were none in that company that laughed at me, but were older than I, and the older they are, the more faults they have committed; and if they laugh at me for my little wit, I will scorn them for their many faults, and hate them for their vices.
The truth is, it is only fools that commit many faults, and take de∣light in their own follies, and do themselves hurt with their own errors; and not those that have Wit: for they have Ingenuity and Prudence to foresee, and so escape errors, and the mischiefs that may follow: But you appear,
by not expressing your self, to your disadvantage, and your silence doth you wrong.
I care not how I appear in my outward Aspect, so my Life be ho∣nest, my Actions just, my Behaviour modest, my Thoughts pure, and that I obey to the utmost of my power the Laws and Customs of Duty, Morality, Divinity, and Civility. But it is a sign of a foolish Age, when silence is thought ignorant simplicicitie, and modesty accounted a crime; when in Ancient Times Youth was taught sober Attention, and it was imposed upon Scholars to keep silence five years before they were suffered to speak, that they might afterwards be able to Teach, and not always live to learn as School-boys, which they would always be, if they spent their time in words, and not stu∣die and observe: And silence is a discretion that few women practise, being more apt to talk than men; for women are fuller of words than thoughts: but words should be weighed by Judgment, in the balance or scales of Sense, and delivered by the tongue through the lips by Retail, which cannot be if they throw them out so fast: for there is required Reason, Time, and Understanding, besides unstopped Ears to hear them: But though mine En∣mies laugh at me for a Fool, yet I have so much Honesty, Innocence, and Modesty, to guard and defend my Reputation, as they cannot wound that with their sharp words, nor laughing faces.
Lady, I come not now to plead with flourishing Rhetoric, to make that which is false to appear like truth, or paint a foul cause with fair smooth words: But my cause of request is honest, and what I shall speak is truth; nor do I strive to hide my Deformities or Vices: As for my outward deformities, they are visible to your Eyes; but Vices live in the Appetites, Passions, and Affections, which are only expressed by the Actions, and therefore the easier may be dissembled from the most part of the World, yet not from Heaven, to whom I am to make a just account: And since my sins are only to the Gods, and not you, fair Godess, I shall not at this time make a public confession of them; but I am come here to present you with my love, which love is as pure as unspotted Angels, it hath no by-respects unto your Wealth, Beauty, or Birth, but barely and merely to your Virtue: in truth I come a wooing to your Soul, not to your Body, but yet mi∣stake me not, I would not have them parted. I cannot say my Estate or Birth deserves you, nor have I merits equal to your worth; but since my love is as pure as your virtue, it will be an equal Match: And though you see my body a deformed bulk, yet I am not ashamed of it, because the owner, which
is my Mind, is honest: for I never betrayed my King, or Country, Mistress, or Friend, nor any Trust that was imposed unto me by any, although a Foe; I never shut my purse, nor sheathed my sword from helping the distressed, nor turned my back upon my assaulting Enemy; I never stole good Fame, nor robed good Names, nor stabbed Innocence with slander; I never scorned those below my self, nor envied those above me; I never infringed the Laws of Honour, nor disturbed civil Society; and though I cannot suffer an injury patiently, yet I never did omit a duty willingly: As for the truth of what I say, I have none to witness for me, as being a stranger, but my own words, from which this company (perchance) may think self-love and great desire hath bribed my Tongue; but if they do, their thoughts make Truth no less, no more than Eyes that are blind, Ears that are deaf, can rob you of your Wit and Beauty: for though your Wit they do not hear, nor Beauty see, yet you passess them no less, their want only robs you of their Admiration, not of the Possession; and say I am blind of one eye, my other eye doth see, and I have Hearing perfectly, which doth inform my Knowledge and Under∣standing, with that which makes my Admirations and Adorations perfect and sound within my Heart, wherein your Picture is printed on, which my Soul doth view, and gazing, kneels with wonder and astonishment, that so much Wit, Wisdom, and Virtue should be in one so young &amp; fair: And if you cannot love me, despise me not; for my pure Love is Divine, as being divinely placed on you; and it would grieve my Soul, to have the zealous fire and immaculate flame of my Affection extinguished with your neglect∣ing Thoughts, and raked up in the ashes of your Forgetfulness: But if any of my Sex shall seem to jest, or scorn me for my outward form or shape,
My Courage and my Sword shall take my bodies part,
To cut their Limbs, or thrust them through their Heart.
Worthy Sir, you must excuse me from answering you at this time: for I am taken on the sudden very sick.
I wish you health, although it were to be only purchased by my death.
What is the cause you weep?
Because my Father will not get me a Husband, and Mistress Fondly will have a Husband before I shall have one: for I hear she is to be married, she is happier in her Parents than I am: for my Parents are unnatu∣ral, and take no care how to get me a Husband, and to see me married.
You may marry soon enough to repent.
I am sure I shall not repent: for to be a Wife, is a condition I am most desirous of, and cannot be happy any other way.
And Wives think Maids only happy, because they are not vexed nor troubled with a Husband.
Such women deserve no Husbands: for certainly a Husband is a joy and a comfort, as being a companion and a friend.
But Husbands seldom keep in the company of their Wives, and many times, instead of a friend, prove an enemy.
What, have you been at Mistress Fondly's House?
Yes.
And have you inquired of her Maid as I bid you, whether the Re∣port is true, that her Mistress is to be married?
Yes.
And what said she?
She said that a Gentleman did Treat with her Mistresses Father, but they could not agree: for the Gentleman would have more portion than her Father would give, whereupon the Match is broke off.
I am glad of that: for I would not have her married before me for all the World. But did you not see mistress Fondly?
No: for her Maid said her Mistress, at the breaking off her Mari∣age, almost broke her heart: for she hath so afflicted her self, and hath so wept and sighed, as she is fallen sick, and keeps her Chamber.
Alas good Friend, I pity her extremely, but I will go with her, and try if I can comfort her.
Noble Sir, the Wit wherewith Nature, Time, and Education hath endued my tender brains, is like new kindled fire, that sparkling flies about, the fuel being green, and newly laid to burn, there is more smoke than flame: But since the time I heard you speak, a newer fire is kindled in my Heart, which equally doth burn with your professed Affections; and though your Person is none of Natures exactest Pieces, yet your Mind doth seem to be composed with all her best Ingredients; and sure your Thoughts set notes of Honour, Honestly, and Love, by which your Tongue plays Harmony. It is not the satin Skin, that's painted white and red, nor near-carv'd Bodies, can win my Love, nor Wealth, Titles, Birth, nor crowned Power; but Truth, Sincerity, Constancy, Justice, Prudence, Courage, and Temperance, by which, as Magistrates, your life seems to be governed, which life I wish the Gods may Crown with happy days, and in Fems Tower long live your praise. I will not ask you from whence you came, nor what you are: For though you seem but poor and mean, Your Soul appears to me sublime.
And will you choose me for your Husband, Lady?
I shall be proud to be your Wife, Sir.
The Gods are just to my pure Love, rewarding it with your ac∣ceptance; but I must beg your leave for some short time of Absence, and then I shall return, and claim your Promise.
You have the liberty, Sir.
Lady, surely you are in a High Fever.
Why, Madam?
As to do so extravagant an Action, as to marry a man you know not what he is, nor from whence he came, and may prove as deformed in Mind as in Body, as mean of Birth, as poor in Parse, as beggars that live on cold dry Charity.
If he be poor, my Estate will make him rich; if humbly born, his Merits make him Honourable; from whence he comes I do not care, and where he will have me go, I will wait upon him, never questioning to what place.
Her Courage is beyond her Wit.
For the Example of this Lady, I would have a Law made, that there should be no more Public Wooing.
She hath cast away her self.
Who can help it?
Lady, why seem you so melancholy?
My melancholy disposition is apt to catch hold on my e∣vile Fortunes, and both joining together, help to multiply my sad thoughts.
Why should you be sad?
How can I be merry, when I am left destitute of Friends, and unac∣quainted with Experience.
Nature hath furnished you with all store, you need none.
If she had, yet all the good seeds that Nature and Education hath sown in me, and sprouted forth in bud, are nipped with Misfortunes, withered with Sorrows, blasted with Sighs, and drowned in Tears.
For what?
For being enslaved unto an unworthy person, who neither loves Fire∣tu, nor values Honour, but laughs at my youth, and flings scorns on my In∣nocency, which makes me almost murmur at Heaven, and apt to think the
Gods unjust, to let Fortune betray me to Power and Tyranny.
Trouble not your self: for certainly your bondage may be taken off, if it be discreetly handled: for he seems willing to part with you upon easy terms; for you heard him offer to sell you.
I wish I were worth your Purchase.
Would you willingly change him for me?
I cannot be worse; and you seem so noble a person, as persuades me to hope I may be happy.
And if I had the whole World, I would give it for you, rather than not have you; and I should think my self more enriched by the enjoy∣meant, than if the Gods made new Worlds to present me.
I have heard Heaven protects the Innocent, defends the Harm∣less, and provides for the Helpless; which if it doth, the Gods will give me you.
Ha, ha, ha, Is this the young wife Lady that all the World ad∣mired for her Prudence and Judgment?
Faith her Judgment hath erred in her choice.
I am glad: for now I may marry to whom I will, for I cannot choose worse; and my Father and Mother did bid me, nay charged me to imitate her.
So did mine.
And mine.
Well, for my part I rejoice: for now we shall have the old way of Wooing again, to embrace and kiss in corners, to hear amorous and wan∣son discourse.
That way of wooing is best.
You say true: for I hate this way of wooing, there is no plea∣sure in it:
No 'saith, to stand gazing and prating a mile asunder.
You make short miles.
Why, two inches is a Lovers mile, and three a long league.
It was not likely she should choose well, or ever be happily mar∣ried.
Why so?
By reason she was cursed by all the maids, back-holders, widows and widowers in the Town.
But she had the prayers of all the married women.
But she had the curses of all the married men: for they crowd in amongst the back-holders sometimes.
Sweet Madam, you are the Godess which my Thoughts adore,
You flatter.
Love cannot flatter: for Lovers think all their praises truth.
The Lady Mute is your Godess.
If there were no other Godess of your Sex but she, I should become an Insidel to love, nay an Atheist, believing there were no such De∣ity as Love.
Madam, all the Town condemns you.
And do you condemn me too?
No, Madam: for I am bound, as being your servant, to submit to your will, liking, and pleasure.
Why, the choice is honest: for they may swear I am not ena∣mored with his Person: But had he been a fair Youth, or known to be a debanch'd Man, they might have justly condemned me, either for my fond Affection and amorous Love, or wilde Choice.
Faith they may thiak your Choice is wilde, by reason you have chosen out of a Labyrinth, not knowing where his beginning or end is.
Why Virtue is the Beginning, and Happiness, I hope, will be the End.
I wish it may prove so Madam.
But pray tell me, Did you ever hear me speak worse than I did to him?
How do you mean, Madam, in that you gave your self away?
No, in that I did not present my self more Eloquently.
Methought your Speech did not flow so smooth as it was used to do, as if your Tongue did know you did commit a fault in granting to his Suit.
No truly; for my desire did out-run my speech: for desiring to speak best to him I loved most, obstructed my Tongue, which made my words run unevenly.
That's a common misfortune: for when any one strives to speak wisely, they most often speak foolishly.
It is true; for strife is an enemy to speech: for those that speak not free and easy, never speak well.
For when as Passion wrestles with the Tongue,
The Sense is weak, and down the words are slung,
It is strange the Lady Prudence, that is so beautiful, rich, and nobly born, and hath so great a wit, should choose a man so poor and mean, and so ill-favour'd.
In my opinion it is not strange: for certainly there is a sympathy between the spirits of virtuous souls, which begets love, although in de∣formed persons: And this is the true Love; for that which proceeds from Covetousness, or Ambition, or is produced by the Senses, is rather an Ap∣petite, which is apt to surfeit, or dies as soon as enjoyed, or turns with For∣tunes wheel.
Well, I wish for the Ladies sake, who is known to be Virtue∣os, her Husband may prove as Virtuous as she.
Ladies, do you hear the News?
What News?
Why Mistress Simple is gone very early this morning out of Town with Sir Anthony Gosling; and it is said they will be married before they return.
I cannot believe it: for she was the most unlikely to be married of any of us all.
I perceive that Maid that can have Fortune to be her friend, shall not want a Husband.
You say true; and Fortune is a better friend than our Parents are: for our Parents are contented we should live Maids all the time of our lives, when Fortune (most commonly) gives Maids Husbands at one time or other.
Ladies, why do you complain of your Parents for their wary care? who would not have you marry, but to such Husbands as you may be happy withal, and therefore are cautious how to choose, when Fortune makes Matches at Random.
I had rather marry at Random, than not marry at all.
Why then (perchance) in stead of a worthy person, you may marry a base fellow; and in stead of a rich husband, a beggar.
Those women that are curious in their Choice, may chance to die old Maids.
It is better to die an old Maid, than to live a miserable life, which will be, if an unhappy Wife.
There is no misery like being an old Maid.
O that I were so happy once to be a wedded Wife,
I would fulfil my Husbands will all the days of my life.
I doubt I may sing the Song that says,
O pity take upon me now some gentle Body,
And give me the Willow-Branch, for no man will have me.
And I may sing this old Song.
I wander up and down,
And no body cares for me:
Although I be but poor and brown,
Yet constant will I be.
And I may sing this old Ballad.
Every Bird can choose his Mate,
The Wren can do the same,
The Fish and Fowl their pleasures take,
They follow after Game.
But I, poor I, poor silly I,
Do sigh and sorrow still,
Yea night and day I wear away,
Wanting my wished will.
Come, come, Ladies, you are all so desirous to marry, and so impatient because you are not married, as I doubt when you are married, your Husbands may sing the Song of Cuckolds all a row.
It were better for us that our Husbands should be Cuckolds, than we lead Apes in Hell.
Why do you weep, Madam?
Have I not reason, when one I chose for Honesty proves false, and publicly strives for to disgrace me, by breaking of his Promise, and Ap∣pointed day of Marriage?
Perchance he could not come, some Accident hath hindered him.
He might have sent me word the reason of his stay.
It is likely he is not so rich, as to hire a Messenger.
Some would have done it for Charity.
Faith Charity is lazy, and will not go without Reward.
If he had loved Me or Honour, he would have found some means or ways.
My Virtuous sweet Mistress, what makes such showrs of Tears in Sun-shine Eyes?
O Sir, I thought you had forsaken me, and left me to the Worlds wilde scorn.
I should sooner forsake Life, Fame, and Heaven, than forsake you.
Will you have your Friends to your Wedding, Mistress?
If you please, Sir: for I am not ashamed of my Choice, nor shall I be ashamed of my Marriage.
Nor I, of my self; and for you, the Gods may envy me.
Shall we go to visit Mistress Simple? she that is now my Lady Gos∣ling, and bid her joy.
Yes, if you will: for I long to see how she looks, now she is a Wife.
So do I, and to see how she behaves her self, since she is married.
She is now, Ladies, for the conversation of Wives, and not for the society of Maids; her discourse will be now of Household Affairs, as of Housewifery, and of her Husband, and of Children, and hired servants, and not Suitors and Courtiers, not Fashions, nor Dressings; neither will she re∣turn your Visits: for her Visitings will be to other married Wives, and her time will be spent at Labours, Christenings, Churchings, and other Matri∣monial Gossippings and Meetings.
Howsoever we will go visit her.
I wish we may see her Husband with her, to see if he be kind to her, or not.
If he be not kind to her, and hath been married but two or three days, he will never be kind.
I wonder whether he will kiss her when we are by.
Yes certainly: for new-maried men and their wives take a pleasure to kiss before company.
Hey ho, that married Wives should have such pleasures, when Maids have none.
O unfortunate villain! that I should be such a Coxcomb, such a Fool, to lose five thousand pounds at Dice! Those bones spotted with the small Pox, the great Pox take them for me, and the Plague to boot: for they have plagued me, and yet I have not a token left about me.
You may borrow more.
Borrow, you Puppy, you, my land's entailed, a perpetuity, I have nothing but for life, like a Serving-mans Annuity, or an old Ladies Jointure, no body will lend me any thing; and now I must eat grass and hay: for we are all mortal they say, and they choke me with that. Pox of my Grand∣fathers and Fathers provident Wisdoms, with their learned Counsels in the Law; but I hope all their souls fry in Hell for it, that's my com∣fort.
It is a hard case, that a young Gentleman cannot undo himself for those Fetters and Bonds of Parchment; truly it is cruel.
I, is it not Jack, to be tied thus, like a dog to a cup-board, and in chains too, that he cannot gnaw or bite them asunder?
Faith Sir, it is a strange thing, that a man should venture to play his money, whether it should be his or another mans.
No Dick, you are deceived, I play whether his money should be mine or his. O unfortunate Rogue that I am! and that foolish Star-gazer, the Astrologer, never to see it in my Nativity neither when he cast it! Those Knaves and Fools, to talk of things that they have no guess at what they are, as if the seven Planets, or the twelve Houses, had to do with a cast of Dice, a sine nimble Cheater is worth a thousand of them. Rogue that I am! And now comes in such a consideration into my brain upon my Re∣pentance.
As how pray?
As how? why if I had this current running money, nay rather, it hath wings, and flies beyond the Fiction of Pegasus: why, if I had it, how I would bestow it for the good of the Common-wealth, as thus: What rich Apparel, with Embroideries of gold, and silver, and silk? what Feathers and Mistresses? what gilt Paris Coaches, Pages, and Lackeys, sa•s number, in rich liveries? what Coachmen, Pos•ilions, with six Flanders Horses, to strike with amazement the whole street as I pass? what running Horses, Hounds, Hawks, Cocks, Greyhounds? what delicious Banquets, Spanish Perfumes, most odoriferous, soft Music, that should lull the soul asleep, sumptuous Furnitures, so as I would surfeit the Senses, and make the seven Deadly Sins live like Princes?
And set up Sin and Vanity to the hight,
Since those are still the Gentlemen's delight.
But O my money is gone, which cuts off all my hopes of exercising all those virtuous ways! well, let me cogitate, and boy, give me a melancholy Pipe to cloud all hopes of joys with sadder thoughts.
Truly it is pity he hath lost his money: for you hear how Religi∣ously he would have spent it.
Most like a Gentleman, I must needs say that for him.
Most piously indeed; but prithee let us walk for a while, lest we should disturb his Thoughts: no more Discourse, but let us tie our Tongues.
Content, till his be loose.
What Contemplation now?
Pious and charitable ones. But this damned money, this runnagado, this vagabond money!
But if you had a statute to whip her home to her own Parish, it would do well.
I Jack, but there is no such law, the more the pity; but this oboe∣minable money disorders all the World. What work makes it betwixt Pa∣rents and Children, Husbands and Wives, Brothers and Sisters, Masters and Servants, Landlords and Tenants, Citizens and their Prentices, Mistresses and their Maids, and between Kings and their subject? Corrupts all the World, breaks Friendship, betrays Friends, raises Rebellions, commits Treason, and corrupts Virgins: It is the Pander and Bawd to all business; the States-man is fed by this damned Lady Pecunia, the Lawyer serves her, the Merchants her slave, the Shop-keeper her vassal, and the Countryman her Tenant, Lords and Ladies her pensioners, and greatest Monarchs pay tribute to her; the Logician argues for her, the Orator pleads for her, and many Ecclesiasticals preach for her, the Vicar General and his Conclave are ruled by her, and the poor Poet, she draws his copperas from his ink, and makes him flatter her. This horrid Lady Sorceress, so to bewitch the World! Is there no law a∣against this Enchantress, that thus doth still abuse the World, and all that's in it? The very Soldiers sword is charmed by her, and all his guns are si∣lent at her presence. This she-devil!
But I would you had your she-devil again for all that: But what Pious and Charitable Consideration had you, if you had your money again?
Marry Sir, First I would build an Hospital for decayed Ladies that were maimed in Venus's wars, losing a nose, or so, never yet any care taken of them, the more is the pity.
Very good: and what next?
Next I would buy such a piece of ground, and build a Bedlam, and then put in all such Divines as preach themselves out of their power and riches; and I would put all such Lawyers in, as pleaded themselves out of pra∣ctice; and all such Citizens as petitioned themselves out of trade.
These are good and pious Acts: But would not you provide a place or means for such as were undone by playing at Dice and Cards, and the like.
No, they should have only Fools Coats to be known by, and I would be the Master of them.
How doth your Husband, Madam?
I hope he's well, he's gone abroad.
You look pale since you were married.
I was not very well this morning: for I could not eat my Break∣fast; truly I have lost my stomach since I have been married.
Perchance you are breeding.
Oh sie, no surely; but yet my Maid laughs, and tells me I am.
I hope, Lady, you are not breeding already? for you have not been married above three days.
I have heard that some have been with Child as soon as they were married; and my Maid told me she served a Mistress, who, the next day she was married was with Child.
By my Faith that was very soon.
Me thinks it is strange to see you have a Wedding-ring on your Thumb.
You will come to wear a Wedding-ring on your Thumb one of these days.
What is the Posy?
I like too well to change.
It is well you do: for if you did not, you could hardly change, un∣less your Husband dies.
Heaven forbid: for I would not have him die for all the World; for he is one of the lovingest and fondest Husbands that ever was.
The first Month is a fond Month, Lady.
And are you fond of him?
Yes truly: for I hang about his neck when he is at home.
But you will weary your Husband, Lady, if you hang a long time.
I would very sain you did see my Husband.
We much desire so to do.
Is your Master, Sir Anthony Gossing, come home yet?
No, Madam.
In truth he is too blame to stay out so long, knowing I am not well when he is away.
Are you sick in his absence?
I am best pleased when he is with me.
New-maried Wives are always so; but after they have been married some time, they are worst pleased when their Husbands are with them.
Me thinks it is a strange sight to see such a Bride, and such a Bridegroom. I do imagine them to be like Pluto and Proserpine.
Nay rather, they are like Venus and Vulcan.
But she is too chaste to entertain a Mars to Cuckold him.
It is to be hoped she will take her liberty with variety: for extra∣vagant love is seldom constant.
If that rule prove true, he may be a Cuckold indeed.
It is likely he will: for women choose to marry such deformed men a purpose; first to excuse their fault, thinking the World will never con∣damn them, their Husbands being ill-favour'dly misshapen, or thinking their Husbands will be well content, knowing their own infirmities, to be a sharer.
But I wonder she did not new-cloath him: for though he is not so rich to buy himself a Wedding-Suit, yet she hath means enough to buy him many several suits, and rich.
There was no time to make him Wedding-cloaths, because he came not till his Wedding-day.
Well, let us go see them married, and wish them joy.
Since my losses, I have such a desire of Revenge, as my fingers itch to be at it, and the Palsy is in my eldow with the imagination of throw∣ing those partial bones, called by the Vulgar, Dice; they say they are square fellows, but I doubt it: Well, have at them, whatsoever comes on it; for I long more for them, than the great Belly that longed to bite her Husbands Nose, or to give him a box on the Ear; or she that threw her loas into a barrel of Tar; and if I have not my longings, in my Conscience I shall mis∣carry.
Take heed Sir, that you do not miscarry, if you have the Dice.
How can he do that? for he hath nothing to miscarry withal, not a farthing, his pockets swell not; it is but an imaginary Child, a windy or watery Mole, or a Moon-calf; he needs no Dice to be his Midwife for the La∣die Pecunia, a mere Timpani of the Fancy, and nothing else.
O Jack, thou art cruel! there is nothing so horrid as truth to a Gen∣tleman, and such truths too. I know not what to do with my self: for I can∣not be alone, those are such foolish fellows that have parts, as they call them, and I hate both them and their parts.
Look here is my foolish Mistress, by the Gods I'll play her, I'll set her you, Sir William Holdfast, what will you stake against her?
Sir, a Lady, and such a Lady, is beyond price unvaluable.
Come, come, leave your Courtship to Ladies, and throw, and have at her.
Why Sir, with the Ladies leave, I will set you five thousand pound.
Five thousand pound? why she hath two thousand pound land a year man, and is an Heir.
But I consider a Wife is chargeable: for I shall maintain her ac∣cording to her Birth, and my own Honour; besides, children will come on, and they are chargeable.
For her charge, I will maintain her as cheap as a Changeling, a Dairy-maid, or a Kitchin-wench: why, she is a fool, and for children, you will not have them the first day certainly; but her Estate will maintain her, and make thee rich; besides, a witty Wife is a curse, and a fool but a Trouble.
But I consider there are two Jointures go out of her Estate.
Why, they are so old, they will both pick over the Perch the next Fall, and die of the Frownsies; or if not, I will present thee with a little Rats∣banc for them, to put in their Caudles.
Well Sir, I honour the Lady so much, as I will set ten thousand pound against her.
By the Gods, make it but fifreen thousand, and here I set her.
Content, and we will take one another words, and these Noble Gentlemen shall be the witnesses.
With all my Soul. Give me the Dice, they that throw most at three throws with three dice, let them win: for three is the Ladies number But first let me invoke them.
Thou Lady Fortune, here I do implore thee,
Now metamorphosed into Dice that's three
My better Fate with Sixes to be crowned,
Thy Favourite winning fifteen thousand pound.
Throw Sir, without any more Invocation of this various Godess.
Come, you Fool, stand here on my side, and now have at your mo∣ney Sir. Two fives and a six? it is well; again, two fixes and a five? I thank thee Lady Fortune, if I win, thou shalt never be called a whore again, but a virtuous and pious Lady; once again, three sixes? Sweet Lady Fortune, how have they wronged thee heretofore, in laying their own follies to thy charge! Malicious lying Detractors, that defame Ladies thus.
Here take the Dice, which are so square and new,
And bid your fifteen thousand pound adieu.
You will give me leave to throw Sir (Throws) what is that, three sixes?
Well, again.
Three sixes again? I vow I believe she is a Virtuous Lady in∣deed.
I cannot tell yet, I will not take upon me for the noblest Lady in the World, throw again, and I will tell you.
Why then have at your Mistress; three sixes again? O Virtuous Lady Fortune!
By the Gods, Jack, the Lady Fortune is a whore, a pocky whore.
Why did you meddle with her then? I knew you would get a Clap.
Nay I have got two; but now I shall have a strict Diet that will cure me.
Are you pleased with my Fortune?
Yes.
It is an injury to Nature to whisper out your words, but rather they should be blown abroad by Fems loud Trumpet.
Had I Rhetoric, as I have none, the loudness of the voice would take away the Elegance of the Speech, and drown the sense of the Subject: But I desire you, and all the rest of this Company may know, I am so well pleased with the Change, as for this Act of Fortunes savour, I shall become a Votaress to Her Deity, for whom I will build an Altar more famous than Mausolus's Tomb; it shall be built with Rhetoric, polished with Eloquence, carved with Allegories, pencilled with Fancies, and gilded with Praise; the Materials shall be wise Brains, honest Hearts, and eloquent Tongues; on this Altar shall burn the Fire of Life, and all the Actions of Industry shall be of∣feared thereon.
What, can you speak?
I am not dumb, although my name is Mute.
You were almost as silent as if you were dumb, all the time you were mine.
It is true; but now I am set at liberty, my Tongue can run freely.
Why, you are as much bound to him now, as you were to me before.
I account this bondage a freedom: for none can be a slave that is bound to a worthy person, who hath a noble nature.
Pray Sir Thomas Letgo do not Court my fortunate Mistress: for though you thought her a fool, I know her to be both wise, and also to have a great Wit.
I fear my wit is but an Infant-wit, and lies in swathling-clouts a∣sleep in the cradle of obscurity: But Time may give it growth, and practice strength, and experience may bring it into the light of knowledge.
If you had no Affection for me, yet you might have had so much civility, as to have expressed your self sociable.
Civility doth not bind any one to divulge their own infirmities, as to express their ignorance by their discourse; besides, for my part, I was so bashful and fearful, lest I should cause errors, and make such defects as were not naturally in me, but only produced by innocent ignorance, which made me choose silence to shun scorns; but I found it was not a sufficient defence.
Here is a Miracle, not only that the dumb speaks, but she that was thought a natural Fool, proves a great Wit.
That word, Wit, that those Ladies return in scorn, I with Industry will make it like a reflection, to cause a double light, and give a greater heat of Sense, Reason, and Judgment, Fancy and Phrase.
Sir, if I behave my self indiscreetly, impute it to an over-flowing joy; and those follies I commit, are not by Nature born, nor yet by Education bred in me.
Sweet Mistress, you can no more be guilty of a fault, than Angels
in Ioves Mansion. Fare you well, Sir Thomas Letgo, the Lady Liberty will counterpoise your losses.
Let her go, Sir Thomas Letgo: for if she be not a Fool, for cer∣tain she is wanton, or otherwise she would not be so well pleased with change.
He hath affronted me.
There is no change so visible, as the most opposite: but Sir Tho∣mas Letgo is both troubled and angry: wherefore Lady Liberty, you had best try to pacify him.
He is like little children, which despise what they have, but cry when they are taken from them.
Ha, ha, ha, prithee teach me something to keep in laughter, or I shall disgrace my self for ever.
Are you so loosely set together, that you cannot hold?
No, I shall burst out laughter at this ridiculous Wedding, before all the Bridal Company, and so be thought rude.
If you burst out nothing else, the company will excuse you: for Weddings are composed of mirth and jollity, and every one hath liberty and leave to sport and play, to dance and skip about.
But if the Bridegroom limping should come to take me out to dance, I shall laugh in his face, which he will take as an Affront, and then will kick me with his wooden stump.
O no, he seems too wise to take Exception, and too civil to kick a Lady; he will rather kiss you, than kick you.
I had rather he should kick me thrice, than kiss me once, by Iupiter. I would not be his Bride, to be the Empress of the whole World.
It is probable, nor he your Bridegroom.
Come away, the Bride is going to bed, and you stand talking here?
To bed, say you? If I were she, I would first choose to go to my
Grave. Hymen and Cupped bless me from such a bed-fellow as the Bridegroom.
Prithee let us watch, to see if we can descry whether he hath clo∣ven feet or not?
Should he have no Cloven Feet, yet certainly the Original of his shape came from Hell: for surely he was begot by the Devil, on some witch or another, and his Clothes were spun by the Devils Dam.
The truth is, he hath damnable old clothes on, they seem as if they were made of old rags, scraped out of dunghills.
I perceive, Ladies, you prefer Beauty and Clothes, before Fire∣tu and Merit.
Faith Virtue is too rigid to be beloved, and Merit is but an encore∣poreal Spirit, and an incorporeal Spirit is no good bed-fellow.
Wherefore I would have a Handsome, Personable, Fashionable, Courtly man.
Nay, if I could have my wish, I would wish for more than one man.
The truth is, that one man would have too much by either of those Ladies.
Was it not enough to win, but to affront me with my losses?
Its true; they say Losers have only leave to speak, but Winners may be merry.
Was there no subject for his mirth but I?
You are a false cheating fellow.
You are a base lying Villain, for saying so.
You have cozened me of my Mistress, and I will have her again.
I have won her saitly and honestly, and I will keep her with my Life.
For Heaven-sake leave off to sight for me, I am not worth the life you hazard for me.
Sweet Mistress, fear not, Death hath no power on me, so long as you stand by.
O let my sad complaints, like murmuring Rivers, flow thorough your Ears, that running into your Heart, may move it to a gentle pity.
You should have let them fight, to see whether Portune hath the same power on their Swords, as she hath on the Dice? whether she can dis∣pose of Life and Death, as of Honour and Riches?
You may part us now, but we shall meet again.
My dear Mistress, what makes your eyes to flow?
As my tears flow thorough my eyes, so I wish my life may flow thorough my tears, then might you live in safety.
Let not your love to me make waste of such Tears, that every drop might save a Life, nay save a Soul, they are so pure and penetrating. But your fears doe apprehend my Foe more dangerous than he is.
Faith confess to us your Maiden-companions, do not you repent?
So fat am I from repentance, as I should repent, were I not as now I am.
You will repent before seven years.
Seven years? you mean seven days: for seven years to our Sex, is se∣ven Ages; for Maids and Widows account it so before their marriage, and married Wives do account time so until their Husbands die.
Faith I think there are few women, but when they marry, hope to be Widows.
That's certain; and were it not for such hopes, men would hardly get Wives.
Fair Ladies, as other men strive to adorn themselves, to mend their broken Bodies, and patch up their decays with false and feigned shows, to cozen credulous women, that think them such as they appear, when they abuse your sweet &amp; gentle natures: But lest my Wife should think me better than I am, or expect more than I could give her, I formed my self far worse than Nature made me; nor have I promised more than well I can perform.
And if she loved me crooked, lame, and blind,
Now I am perfect, she'll not be less kind.
Heyday, Riddle me, riddle me, what's this? A man blind, and not blind, lame, and not lame, crooked, and not crooked, ill-favour'd, and handsome.
Faith it is like the Tale of the great Bear of warwick.
What Tale was that?
Why of a King that had three Daughters, and when they were of marriageable years, the King their Father asked them whether they had ra∣there to have a Husband that were a man a days, and a beast at nights, or a Husband that was a beast at days, and a man at nights? and if they would marry, they must choose one of those that were sometimes men, and some∣times beasts, or otherwise they must never marry; but they, rather than to live old Maids, were resolved to marry, were their Husbands at all times beasts: so the two eldest chose to have their Husbands men a days, and beasts at nights; for, said they, we can conceal their beastliness at nights, but not a days, for the light will divulge them to the public view of the World; but the youngest chose a Husband, one that was a beast a days, and a man at nights: for, said she, I will please my self, not caring what the World thinks or says: for I am sure, said she, the World cares not what I think or say; whereupon they were all three married, and the youngest Ladies Husband was a great Bear a days, but a very handsome man at nights.
O that every woman were so well matched! for then they would be always pleased, and never jealous: for in the day-time, when men doe Court and plead Loves Suit, and point out private meetings,
They have no words to woo, nor persons for to win,
And in the night their Wives their Arms do circle in.
But say your Husband the He-bear, should meet a Mistress She-bear, I believe you would be jealous then.
I confess I should be somewhat lumpish.
Hey, ho!
What is the cause you sigh?
Nature never made so handsome a man as the Bridegroom.
And you sigh because you are not the Bride.
Faith the Devil tempts me to break a Commandment.
What Commandment?
To covet my Neighbours goods.
Why he is no part of your Neighbours goods, unless he be a good man.
Well, he is a goodly man, and whether he is a man that is good, I cannot tell: But howsoever I will never trust the outside more, I will never believe a patched eye is blind, nor a bunched back is crooked, nor a wooden leg lame, as long as I live.
And if you will not believe it whilst you live, when you are dead, I doubt you will forget it; but howsoever the Devil tempts me as much as you to covet him that's none of mine.
Pray Ladies give me leave to remember you, in that you said you would not be his Bride, were it the way to make you Empress of the whole World.
It is true; but then we were blind of one eye as he was; but now we see with both our eyes as he doth.
Come, let us go into the Bride-chamber, and out-dare his beauty on the forfeiture of our hearts.
You need not go to seek Love: for he will catch you, although you run away.
And you will catch Love, if with the Bridegroom stay.
I doubt that.
Let me persuade you to be friends: for if you seem to mourn for that which you made slight of, and to quarrel unjustly, and sight for for that you cannot have, nor is not rightly yours, you will be thought im∣prudent, shunned as a wrangling Gamester, and accounted a Ranting Di∣sturber, and laughed at for a fool, for setting such a Mistress at a stake you thought too much to lose; but if you will save your Reputation, you must seem to rejoice you are quit of her.
Well, I will take your counsel; and I have this satisfaction, That I am not the first man that hath been deceived by Women, nor shall not be the last.
That's true; and so generally it is known, as it is become an or∣denariate saying, and the saying will be made good as long as mankind lasts: for
though men may dissemble to women, yet it is women that deceive men, and we glory in it.
Do you hear the News?
What News?
Why the Bridegroom is proved to be the Great Duke of Gran∣dy's Son.
How so?
Why you have heard that the old Prince of Grandy had two Sons, and the younger Son would not be persuaded from going to Travel, and it was reported he was drowned in a Voyage by Sea, for which his Father mourned a long time, as loving him extremely; and you know, to add to his afflictions, his Eldest Son dies, so as he became as childless, until this time that his Son is returned safe, for which he is the most joyed man that e∣ver was, and is so fond of the Prince his Son, as he continually embraces and kisses him, and hangs about his neck like a fond Bride.
Why did he come so privately, and in a disguise?
As for his private coming home, the reason was, That having oftentimes asked the Magor, to return into his own Country, and being as of∣ten denied, and at last threatened to be destroyed if he should offer to go a∣way, and quit the Magor's Service: for this Prince was General of all his Forces, and was the man that the Merchants cried up to be another Iulius Caesar, although they knew not of what birth or quality he was of; but to get away, he was forced to steal away in a disguise, in which disguise he wooed and won his Lady, the now Princess: for whilst he lay privately in the City, until such time as he could handsomely &amp; conveniently discover him∣self, he hearing the talk of the Public Wooing, and also of the Virtue, Beau∣tie, and Wit of the young Lady, went to hear and to see her, whom he no sooner heard and saw, and being taken with her good Fame, honouring her Virtue, admiring her Beauty, and being extremely delighted with her Wit, became a Lover, and also a VVooer; but for the better trial of her Virtue, he wooed her in his disguised, deformed shape, and unknown quality, left his Dignity and Wealth might have enticed her Ambition, and not his Merit, to have won her Love, or his Person might have caught her Eye, but not his Love her Heart.
The Gods are just, rewarding in the end the good intentions with good success, and Virtue with felicity.
Virtue and Honour you did take,
And Beauty scorned as voting;
Thus you a Godess it doth make,
Rove mortal Ladies trading.
They love the Body, you the Soul,
They Shape, but you the Mind,
Your Love those grosser loves control,
Which shows their Love is blind.
His wooden Leg is thrown away,
The black Patch for the blind,
The Bunch on's back assuaged to day,
As handsome as his Mind.
This now is your reward, Sweet Madam,
The Gods they are not lath
To give you one, handsome as Adam,
And thus enjoy them both.
Loves Miracles not ceased be,
The Lame to walk, the Blind to see,
The Crooked is made straight, it is true,
And these Loves Wonders made by you.
His Body metamorphosed is,
By your Ambrosia sweeter kiss;
Such power hath Love when you do sip
The Gods pure Nectar from your Lip.
All Joys attend you night and day,
Be each to other fresh as May,
Renewing pleasures everyhower,
And sweeter than the sweetest Flower.
Envious Ladies now rapine,
Since you are crossed,
In having lost
A Prince so handsome and so fine.
Mourn in black patches for your sins,
Despair each Curl,
And every Purl,
And throw away your dressing-pins.
Lay by your richer Gowns of State,
For now you'll faint,
For all your paint,
When 'think of your unhappier Fate.
For these Love-pitfals they are stale,
And all despise
Your glancing Eyes,
For all forced Arts in Love they'll fail.
Now let your specious gliding pass,
Or your Lips fed
With biting red,
Despair, and break each Looking-glass.
What, Ladies, are you Thunder-struck with the Princes Honour, or are you blasted with the Lightning of his Splendour, or crushed with the wheel of her good Fortune?
Lord, Lord, how blindly Fortune throws her gifts away!
One would think she had clear Eyes, when she bestowed her Fa∣vours upon the Princess.
She is become so proud, since she is become a Princess, as she will not look on us that were her companions; and she thinks scorn to speak to us: for she said not one word to any of us.
She had no occasion to speak to you; but I am confident, If you speak to her, you will find her as civil and obliging, as ever she was.
Faith we care not: for we can live without being obliged to her.
They are not the happiest that have the greatest Titles.
Pride will have a Fall.
I perceive it is hand to get the good opinion of the World: for you railed at her Course, laughed at her Choice, condemned her Marriage, and now you envy her good Success.
We envy her? you are mistaken: for she must be of greater va∣lue, and we less worthy than we are, to raise an Envy.
Nay Ladies, if you are angry, I will leave you.
Then we shall be rid of a prattling fool.
O, wisdom in youth is a wonder.
Happy is that Parent that hath a discreet Child.
Such Children give their Parents Honour in their Graves.
Pray let us Petition that a Law may be Enacted for this Pub∣lick Wooing.
We shall not need to Petition: for the Princess, I dare war∣rant you, will get the Prince to Enact a Law for this Public Wooing for her Fame, she being the only first that hath been wooed so.
Well, Daughters, make her your Pattern.
Yesterday, that was the Wedding-day, my Parents did condemn the Bride, calling her Fool, and saying she was mad, and forbid me to imi∣tate her.
It is no wonder our Natures are so various, when as our Educate∣on are so inconstant: for we are instructed to imitate Fortune, which is to be restless, and to spoil that good we have done.
Or to better the worse.
No faith: for I perceive Fortune hath more power to do hurt than good; for Fortune ruins, or at least disturbs Virtuous Acts, and frustrates Wisedom's Counsels.
Ladies, the Princess desires your company to dance.
Pray excuse me Sir: for I have so great a pain on my left side, as I can hardly fetch my breath.
And I have such a pain in my head, as I date not dance, for fear it should ache more.
And truly I have so straight a shoe, as it is a pain for me to tread a step.
And I am not well in my stomach: wherefore excuse us Sir to the Princess.
God give you Joy, I have not seen you since you were married.
You are welcome into the married Society.
I thank you Madam. Truly I am so tired.
With what, Madam?
With helping my Neighbour the Lady Breeder to hold her back.
Why, is she in Labour?
She is brought to Bed; but on my word she hath had a hard bar∣gain: for she hath had a sore Labour.
What hath God sent her?
A lusty boy. Indeed it is one of the goodliest children that ever I saw.
But how chance she did not send for me to her Labour?
She came on such a sudden, as she had hardly Time to send for the Midwife; but she was mightily troubled you were not there, she doubts you will take it ill.
We have reason: for if we could not have come time enough to her Labour, we might have come time enough to the cup of Rejoicing.
But she will bid you to the Christening.
That's some amends: But this hard labour of the Lady Breeders will fright you.
No: for I have as much courage as other married Wives have, though truly, Sir Anthony Gosling, my Husband, was very loath I should go: for (said he to me) prithee sweet Duck do not go: I answered and said to him, my hony-love I must go, for it is the part of one wife to help another; besides, a gossipping company doth help to ease the women's pains; and if I go not to their Labour, they will not come to mine.
Why, are you with Child?
No, but I hope I shall be shortly.
Come, we will go and chide your Husband, that he hath been ma∣ried a week, and his Wife not with child.
Yes, pray go chide him, and I will bear your company.
Sir, pray persuade the unmarried Ladies to dance: for I can∣not entreat them.
That's strange: for Ladies will dance without entreating; for no entreating will make them sit still.
It seems they are not in their dancing-humour to day: for every one finds some excuse for to deny.
Let them alone, and take no notice of their reserved humours, and they will dance without entreating; nay, they will entreat you they may dance.
If it please your Highness, the Ladies desire you would give them leave to Celebrate your Marriage with their Mirth, and to express their Joy with their Dancing.
We shall take it as a Favour to our Nuptials.
Did not I tell you they would desire to dance?
Truly I was so ignorant, as I knew not so much the nature of our Sex.
You knew not so much of their follies.
Let us strive to make the Bride jealous.
That's impossible now; but you may not work to good effect some a half a year hence.
Why I have known a Bridegroom leer her the next day he was ma∣ried.
Perchance a Bridegroom may: for men are sooner cloyed than women; but a Bride will fondly hang about her Husbands neck a week at least.
A week? nay a month: for a woman is fond the first month, sick the second month, peevish the third month, coy the fourth month, false the fifth month, and Cuckolds her Husband the sixth month.
Then a married man sprouts Horns in half a year.
Yes: for they are set the day of his marriage, and some half a year after they are budded, but not so fully grown as to appear to the pub∣lick view.
But will nothing hinder the growth?
No faith, but Death; and Death, like a Frost, doth nip those ten∣der buds.
Which death, the mans, or the women's?
The women's: for if the man dies, and his Widow marries again, the dead Husband is horned in his Grave, and the living Husband is horned in his Bed.
Then their Horns may be put together, as Stags in Rutting∣time.
I had rather make Horns, than talk of Horns; therefore I'll go dance.
Where have you been?
At Church.
Did a sit of Devotion hurry you to the Church to pray?
No faith, I went not to pray, but to join a pair of Lovers hands in Wedlocks Bonds: for they chose me to be their Father, to give them in the Church.
What Lovers were they, that were so foolish to marry?
So honest, you mean.
There is more folly in it than honesty, in my opinion.
Thou art an Infidel, nay a very Atheist.
I am a Naturalist. But who are they that are married?
Why Sir William Holdfast and the Lady Mute.
The truth is, he is a worthy Person, and she is a virtuous and sweet Lady: wherefore they deserve each other; besides, she is an Heir, and he hath a great Estate.
He hath so.
What, is the Wedding kept private?
Yes, there are only two or three Friends; but I must go dine with them, therefore fare thee well, unless you will go with me: for you know you shall be welcome.
I know I shall, therefore I shall go with you.
OUr Auth'ress here hath sent me for her pay,
She's at the Charge of Wit to make the Play;
But if you think it not worthy of Praise,
Nor an Applause of Hands, her Fame to raise,
She doth desire that it in pawn may lie,
Till redeemed by a better Comedy.

When I forsake you, let Heaven forsake my Soul.
I do not doubt you: for if I did, I could not love you; and whilst I love you, I cannot doubt you.
O how it wounds my heart to part from you! my Thoughts are tortured, and my Mind is set upon a me∣lancholy Rack.
Since your Journey cannot be conveniently avoided, I will please my self with the hopes of your sudden Return.
Farewell, sweet Mistress, Death is the worst of Nature, and your Absence the worst of Fortune.
Good Master Steward, give Order for some Beef-suet to be brought in: for there is nor any left in the House, and I must make a Venison-pasty; and if I should temper my Pasty all with butter, you would be angry.
Why, cannot you take some of the fat from the Beef-broth for your Crust?
Yes, if every one that eat of it had as fresh a mouth as you, or lo∣ved drink so well as you do, it would serve, otherwise it would be too salt for their palats; besides, I am to make puddings in guts.
If they prove as the last you made, the dogs may eat them
for the guts stunk so much, as no man could eat any of them.
I'm sure it was your fault, in that you did not bring me where∣withal to make them, until such time as the guts began to putrefy.
No, no, you are a Slut, and did not take all the dung out of them, nor wash, nor scrape, nor cleanse them as they should have been; but you order the guts, as you do the dishes, the one is dungy; the other greasy; be∣sides, my Master complains, that his Fowl taste rank, and his Brawn tastes strong, and his Beef tastes musty, and that's because you are so lazy, as not to shift your Brawn into fresh Sousing-drink, nor make the brine strong enough in the powdring-tub, nor thrust your fingers far enough into the Fowls rumps, to draw them clean; besides, when they are roasted, they are as dry as a chip, for want of basting-butter; besides, your sluttery is such, as you will poison all the House: for in one place I find a piece of butter, and a greasy comb full of nitty hairs lying by it; and in another place flour and old-worn stockings, the feet being rotted off with sweat; and in a third place, a dish of cold meat covered with a foul smock, and your dirty shoes (for the most part) stand upon the Dresser-board, where you lay the hot meat; besides, by your carelessness you do waste and spoil so much, as it is unsufferable: for you will fling whole ladlefuls of dripping into the fire, to make the fire blaze underneath the pot; and because you have not the profit of the Kitchen stuff, you will never scrape the Dresser-board, nor Dripping-pans, nor lick the Platters, Trays, or Scummers, Frying-pans, Skillets, Gridirons, Spits, Ladles, Kettles, or any of the Kitchin-vessels, as you should doe, but wash them all with hot water at first, without taking off the grease before∣hand.
Well, if you do not like me, pray pay me my wages, and I will be gone: I'm sure I never served in any place for so small wages and few veils as in this service: I'm sure it is no ways beneficial to me.
I'm sure you'll make it beneficial one way or another: for you have your female Factors that lie abroad, to whom you send Commodities by your She-porters, that come hither every day to transport them. Thus you traffic upon my Masters Cost, and my Reputation: for I am thought the worse of either, as believing I am a false Steward, or a negligent one. Thus a True man is thought a Knave: for by your stealing I am thought a Thief.
You are a base man for saying I steal, I never was accounted a Thief in my life, but always trusty and true, in what Service soever I lived.
She's a pretty Wench, if she had but clean clothes on, by Venus she would be very handsome; a Silk Gown would make her a rare Beauty; her Tears fall on her Nose and Cheeks like gentle showers of rain on Roses and Lilies sweet. O she is a heavenly Creature!
Sweet-heart, where do you live?
In your Worships House.
And whose servant are you?
Your Worships.
How long have you served me?
A Quarter, and't please your Worship.
In what place serve you?
In the Kitchen, an't please you.
What makes you cry?
Your Worships Steward hath wronged me.
How hath he wronged thee?
He says I stole your Worships Kithin-stuff, when the Gods know I am as innocent as the child that is newly born.
He is a Knave for saying so, and I will have him turned out of his Authority for saying so: wherefore cry no more, fair Maid; for thou shalt be preferred to a higher Office.
I thank your Worship.
Sir, did you come lately from Changeland?
Yes Lady.
Pray did you not see a Gentlemon in that Country, ha〈…〉 Francis Inconstant?
I am very well acquainted with him, Lady: for he is my most noble Friend.
I hope he is well.
So well, Madam, as he is resolved to marry.
That he might do, if it were for no other reason, but for a Nurse to tend him, if he should chance to be sick.
By your favour, Lady, it were dangerous for a sick man to be married, especially to a fair young Lady.
But pray Sir, is he to marry a Lady in that Country?
So he told me.
Did he tell you so himself?
Yes Madam, I had it first from his own mouth.
Is she handsome?
Truly I did not see her.
Is she rich Sir?
Truly I heard not what portion she had; but I suppose if she had been rich, her wealth would have made her famous.
Nor you have not heard whether she is discreet, or witty, nor of what humour she is?
No indeed, Lady, I heard not any body speak of her but him∣self, and that was only, That he was to marry a young Lady in that City he was in, and that he thought would be the cause to persuade him to settle in that Country.
How long a time is required to go to that place where he is?
According as the wind is: If the wind be good, twelve hours
fail will land a passenger, and some eight hours riding from the shore, will bring them to the City.
Will you please to walk in and rest your self?
Lord, there is such a quarrel about the falling out of Briget Greasy and Master Steward, as it is wonderful: for my Master chides, Briget cries, and Master Steward maintains his words, as they do so offend and misprove, as you would bless your self.
I will go listen, and hear them.
My Wife, Master Doctor, is very ill.
She is so: for her Disease is not to be cured, my Lord; for we cannot restore the decays of vital parts: for as they consume, life draws towards an end.
But pray do your endeavour to prolong her like as long as you can.
We shall, my Lord, to the utmost of our skill. Your Lordships humble servant.
My Lady desires to speak with your Lordship.
And I desire to speak with your Ladyship.
I am ready to hear your Lordships commands.
And are you as ready to obey them?
Yes, so far as my duty doth oblige me.
Well, then pray do not forget when you are called to pay that duty where you owe it.
If this News could deprive me of my life, it would have made me happy; but it hath almost deprived me of my Reason, and quite from my Patience, which makes me miserable, and Misery is worse than Death: for Death is a cessation of pain, and Misery a torment of life: But if this Report be true, I will lay more curses on his head, than a long pe∣nitential life shall be able to take off.
Lord, Briget is so proud since she is preferred to be my Ma∣sters Laundry-maid, as she will touch none but my Masters linen.
She is become very fine upon her preferment: I am sure it is not five or ten pound wages that will or can maintain her at that rate she goes: for she hath had, to my knowledge, two new pair of shoes within three weeks of each other; whereupon I told her, that the shoes that she cast by, would be very strong and serviceable, if they were cobbled; and her Answer was, what, did I think she would wear cobbled shoes? I told her, why not now, as well as she did? for she used to send her shoes to be cobbled three or four times over, and her waistcoat to be patched, and her petticoats to be new-border'd, and her stockings to be heeled, as the rest of us did; and I knew of no Lands that had befallen her, and therefore she may doe the same still.
And what said she then?
She bid me meddle with my own matters, and not meddle with her; and I dare not offend her, for fear I should be turned away: nay, she is so proud, as she turns her head aside when Richard the Carter comes to kiss her, and she strives to shun his company, when once within a short time, she would make haste to wash her dishes, that she might have time to sit in Richards Lap, and there they would sit colling and kissing until the sea-coal-site was burned out.
But now she sits in a better seat.
I cannot believe he will prove so false and perjurious, but this Disguise, I hope, will bring me to discover the Truth: And if he be false, for his sake may all the Masculine Sex be slaves to the Esseminate Sex, not bound by Love, but by base servile fear; may they long after the power, but never get it; may women govern the World, and when they command, the men dare not disobey, and be despised for their reward; may their Jealousies disturb their Rest, their Cares increase their Labours; may they work like Horses, fawn like Dogs, and bear like Asses. But if he be constant, may all the Masculine Sex be blessed for his sake; may all women desire, admire, and love him; may Pleasure embrace him, Health preserve him, and Time attend him; may he be armed with Power, crowned with Peace, and all Obedience bow to his command; may the sound but of his Name bring joy to all hearts; may all be pleased for his Birth, pray for his Life, and fear his Death; may good Fortune trace his ways, whilst he tides upon the wings of a glorious Fame.
Sweet Mistress, you are the Elixir of Beauty: all other women are as unrefined metal, like base coin.
Whilst I am unmarried you'll flatter me; but when I am your Wife, you will change your complemental discourse to quarrelling dis∣putes, or insulting commands.
O never, never, your Eye shall direct all my Actions, your Commands shall rule my Life, and your Pleasures shall be my only De∣light.
Here, take this Note, that you may not forget the Guests that are to be invited to my Daughters Wedding.
Can you read it?
I cannot tell Sir.
Let me hear if you can, or not.
Imprimis, Sir William Lovewell, and the Lady Hypocondria his Wife.
Item Sir Henry Sage, and the Lady Chastity his Wife.
Item Sir Edward Courtly, and the Lady Jealousy his Wife, and Mistress Iane Single her Sister.
Item Sir Thomas Cuckold, and the Lady Wanton his Wife.
Item Sir Humphey Disagree, and the Lady Disagree his Wife.
Item Sir Timothy Spendall, and the Lady Poverty his Wife.
Item the Lady Procurer.
Item Monsieur Amorous.
Well read, well read: As for the Lord Widower, I know he will not come: for I hear his Lady is newly dead. This is the Nature of the World; some marry, and some die.
Troth Sir, of the two Evils, I think it is better to die than to marry.
I am not of your mind: for I had rather have a ruddy, plain, soft Wench to be my B•d-fellow, than pale, grim, lean, numb, cold Death. But go your way about this Employment, the whilst I will give direction for the Entertainment.
We have reason to weep: for you, my Children, have lost a good Mother, and I a loving Wife, and her servants a kind Lady; but we cannot alter Heavens Decrees: wherefore we must take comfort in what is, and not grieve for what cannot be helped: And now, Daughter Sprightly, you must be as my Wife, Friend, and Daughter all in one: for as your Mo∣there did, when she had health, govern my Family, so must you now she is dead; and you must take care of your young Brothers and Sisters, and Hey∣ven will reward thee with a good Husband and Children of your own: And as for her Maid here, who hath taken great pains all the time of your Mo∣theirs sickness, ought to be rewarded for her care: wherefore, Daughter, let her wait upon you, as she did upon your Mother.
I thank your Lordship.
Surely the Fates have conspired against me, the winds were so cross, just like men, sometimes for us, and sometimes a∣against us.
Have you found out the Gentleman's lodging?
Yes Sir.
And was he at home?
He hath that which will invite him to stay at home, and keep him from wandering abroad for some time Sir.
What's that?
A fair Wife Sir: for a drunken Serving-man told me that one Sir Francis Inconstant had married his Masters Daughter, and that the Wedding-Feast would continue a Week, if not a Fortnight.
And was the man drunk that told you so?
Yes surely: he seemed so to me.
Then (perchance) he might tell you a lye.
He was not so drunk, but that he might tell a truth.
Prithee Friend do me one favour more, and then I will pay thee for thy pains.
What you please to command me Sir.
Then inquire for a mans-Tailor, to make me some Clothes: for I am not Accoutred fit for a Bridal-House.
I shall Sir.
Faith I will go and inquire out a new service: for I will never be boxed by my fellow-servant that was, although now she is preferred to be House-keeper.
How came the quarrel betwixt you?
Why now, forsooth, she is come to Order and to Rectify, she's not only grown light-finger'd, but fine-finger'd, as to touch nothing that is
not bright-scour'd, nor then neither, without her gloves; and she called for a candle and a candlestick to carry into my Masters Chamber, and I for haste run up with the candle, and forgot the candlestick, and had left it behind me: when I came, what, said she, do you bring a candle without a candlestick? Alas said I, I have forgot it; but hold you the candle, said I, and I will run and fetch the stick strait, and so I put the candle into her hand: with that, she up with her hand, and gave me a box on the ear, what, said she, do you give me a greasy candle to hold? I will teach you more manners, said she, against the next time: I being heated at the blow she gave me, cold her, that she had forgot since the Mouse bit her greasy face when she was asleep, taking it for a candles-end, or a piece of bacon: with that, she flew upon me, and I at her, where in the combat we made such a noise, as my Master came forth of his Chamber, and parted us, and then he bid me ge• me out of his house, but kissed her, and prayed her to pacify her anger, and not to distemper her self with a rude wench as I was.
And what said she then?
Why she told my Master I was a naughty Baggage, a dirty Slur, a base Whore, and all the ill names she could; but I will not suffer this, for I will be gone.
Nay, let us stay until we are provided of other Services.
And is he married! O that I could pull out that part of my Brain which imprints his memory! for the wrongs he hath done me are so great and heavy, as I wish I could unload my Soul, and build a Pyramid of Curses, that may stand as a mark of his Infamy.
I had rather banish my self, than live in disgrace in my own Country.
Faith, my Lord, your Daughter is so jealous of me, as she says I am always in your Lordships Chamber.
Why so thou art most commonly, although not always.
But yet it is not fit Children should examine their Parents actions; and it were an indiscretion in Parents to allow of it.
She is young, she is young.
Wherefore your Lordship should have a care to have her pru∣dently governed; and if she be too young to govern her self, how can she go∣vern so great a Family as your Lordships is?
O she hath but the name, my Steward governs all.
Yes; but the Mistress of the House governs the Steward, and the Steward gives Orders as an Inferior Officer, delivering the Superiors commands.
You say true: wherefore you that have some more experience, should counsel her.
O, my Lord, it is not manners for me to give her counsel, neither will she take it from me: for when I humbly offer her my Advice, she checks me, and threatens to turn me away.
Doth she so? But I will have her to take cons, and to know she is too young to order after her own childish fancy.
Indeed, my Lord, she wants years, which should make her experienced. Sweet child, she is fitter to dress Babies, and order a Closet, than govern a great Family, which is a little Common-wealth.
Well, I will order her otherwise.
Sir there is a young Gentleman desires to speak with your Worcester∣ship.
What manner of man is he?
A sweet-fac'd young man, by my Troth Sir.
Of what Country seems he to be?
Of your own Country, Sir.
Direct him in.
Sir, I was commanded by a young Lady to give you this Letter.
She writes as if she were dying when she writ this letter.
She was dying indeed: for the last act she did, was to give me this letter; and the last words she spoke were, Pray see this letter safe con∣•eyed, and so she died.
What makes you so pale on a sudden, Husband?
I am not well, and therefore I must go to my Chamber; But pray Sweet-heart stay you here, lest my being ill shoald disturb our Guests.
Do you think I can entertain them if you be sick?
I am not so sick as to be nursed, although not so well as to delight in company: for I am rather melancholy, than any other way di∣stemper'd.
What makes you melancholy?
Why a dear Friend of mine is dead.
But Sweet-heart, pray excuse me to the company, and pray let this Gentle∣man, my noble Friend, be well treated.
I shall obey your command.
What, is my Son-in-law gone?
Sir, he desires you and the rest of the company would ex∣••se him: for he hath heard of the death of a Friend, which makes him so melancholy, as he saith that his dull and indisposed humour would disturb the mirth of our noble Friends.
It is a sign he is young, that he is so tender-natur'd, and so soft-hearted, to mourn and grieve for those that die; but when he comes to Age, he will only commend his friends that are dead, but not grieve for them: for Pity wears out, as Age increases.
Pray Sir let me entreat you to be one of our Guests.
You shall command me, Lady.
Nay, since the Gentleman hath brought such News as hath banished the Bridegroom from the Company, he shall now supply his place.
Soft Sir, he may at the Board, but not in his Bed.
He looks so modestly, as if he would play the part of a Bride rather than a Bridegroom.
Lady, will you accept of my modest service?
Sir, I must not refuse Modesty.
It is no wonder that Briget Greasy is so proud now, being ma∣ried to my Master, he having made her a Lady. Lord, Lord, to see the fortune that some have over others: why, if my Master would have ma∣ried one of his Maids, he might have chosen a prettier wench amongst any of us all than she is.
Yes faith: for she was thought the veriest Puss of us all; for she is neither snout-fair, nor well-shap'd, she hath splay-feet, and chilblain∣heels.
Nay all will grant she was the dirtiest slut in the House: for there was never a man-servant but would cry so at her when they kissed her; be∣sides, she was the veriest fool amongst us: But Lord, what Wealth and Ho∣nor will do! for now she is a Lady, she looks as if she never washed a dish, or scoured a kettle or spit.
But I wonder how she came to be his Wife, she might have ser∣ved as her Betters have done before her: I am sure there was Nan, a pretty pert, cleanly Maid, who was kind, and willing to do any thing, either to serve our Master, or fellow servants.
O but Nan had not an old woman that used to come to her to get suet and scraps, as Briget had; and this old woman, they say, counselled Briget to seem nice and coy.
I wonder what Richard the Carter will say, who was turned out of his service, because he should not share with my Master.
Faith I heard that Richard was told of her Advancement, and it is said he laughed, and said my Master had a hungry stomach, that he could feed of his leavings; but by his Troth he was glad she was become a Lady: for now he could say he had kissed and courted a Lady as well as the best Gallant of them all.
Daughter, ald ough you do govern my Family very well for your years, yet you are young, and wanting Experience, may be cozened; and though I have a great Estate, yet it will be all consumed, if Order and Method be not put into practice: wherefore I would have you take the counsel of Mistress Dorothy Subtlety, to assist you.
Who is that, my Lord?
Why, do not you know her? she that waited on your Mother.
Pardon me, my Lord, I did not know her by that Title: for she was plain Dol Subtlety when she waited on my Mother, and not knowing of her ad∣vancement
from a Chambermaid to a Gentlewoman, I might easily mistake; besides, she is not so much older, as to have much more experience than my self: perchance she may have more craft, which was learned her in her poverty, than I, who have been bred at the Horn of Plenty, that knew no scar∣city, nor sharking necessity.
You have a sharp tongue when spite moves it; but let me hear no more of these words, but do as I command you.
I never disobeyed you as I do know.
Well, no more words.
Sir, but that you look more like a woman than a man, you might give the Bridegroom more cause to be melancholy for the living than the dead; but let me entreat you, young Gentleman, that you strike not his Head, as your News hath done his Heart: for I perceive the Brides eyes are fixed upon you, and from the root of a sexed eye grows Horns, when they are set in a married Head.
There is no fear.
Yes Sir, as long as there are doubts, there are fears.
There is no doubt Sir.
But that she will be Sir.
What, Sir?
What you please Sir; and let me tell you, young Gentleman, that as long as there are women, there will be Lovers and Cuckolds.
And let me tell you, Sir, that as long as there are men, there will be Fools and Drunkards.
Sir, I doubt we have invited you rather to your trouble, than your delight.
Madam, you are the Treasure of Pleasure and Delight; which none can receive but from your Bounty, nor enjoy but by your Favour.
What had you to do to contradict my commands?
They were not sit to be obeyed, wherefore they were forbid.
There, take that, to remember I forbid you to forbid my com∣mands.
I will declare your blows to some that shall revenge me.
What, are you so light-finger'd? It is time to get you a Husband, to govern and rule your high spirit.
No, pray Sir get me no Husband: for if my Father takes part a∣against me, surely a Husband will be worse natured.
So, you will say I am unnatural.
No Sir, I only say it is not my undutifulness that displeases you, but some that hath more wit than I, or at least good fortune to please you better.
Well, pray study your Book and Work, and leave the Household. Affairs to my disposal.
Sir, I took the Office, as my duty to your commands, not for De∣light, Pleasure, Ease, or Profit, and I shall surrender it up again upon the same account, and with all the trouble, care, labour, vexations and disquiets belonging thereunto.
In doing so, you will do very well.
Heaven bless you wife, what makes you so extremely pale, and to seem so affrighted?
O Husband I have an Imposthume broken within me, and the bag will rise and choke me.
Heaven forbid.
O I am choked, I am choked, I cannot fetch my breath.
O send for Doctors strait: for my wife is ready to die.
How are you, dear Wife? how do you feel your self now? how are you?
O very ill; but yet me thinks I can fetch my breath a little
better than I could, I believe the Imposthume-bag is fallen down: where∣fore I will go to bed.
Pray do Wife.
Sweet-heart, I was in your Bed-chamber, and in your Cabinet-chamber, and missing you in both, I was afraid I must have been forced to have hired a Crier, to have proclaimed my loss.
Many a Wife doth proclaim her Husbands loss without the help of a Crier: for the Wives Adulterous Acts proclaim her Husband a Cuc∣old, and the loss of his Honour.
But I am not afra'd of that: for I am confident of thy Chastity (al∣though the old saying is, Confidence makes Cuckolds.)
Your confidence of me shall never harm you.
But your too serious studies will harm your health; and if you be sick, I cannot be well; besides, it will decay your Beauty, waste your Youth, like Oil spent in a melancholy Lamp, where Life is always blinking.
It were better that my Body should be sick, than my Mind idle; my Beauty decay, than my Understanding perish; my Youth waste, than my Fame lost; my Life blinking, than my Honour sinking: for an idle Mind, not well employed creates a restless body, which runs from place to place, and hates to be at home. Thus Mind and Body both being out, extravagant Words and Actions run about, and Riot keeps possession.
And though the Beauty withers and decays,
Yet Wit and Wisdom with the ruin stays:
And if the Youth doth waste, and Life's Oil's spent,
Yet Fame lasts long, and builds a Monument:
A melancholy life doth shadows cast,
But sets forth Virtue, if they are well placed.
Then who would entertain an idle Mirth,
Begot by Vanity, and dies in scorn?
Or proud, or pleased with Beauty, when the Birth
Becomes the Grave or Tomb as soon as born?
But Wisdom wishes to be old and glad,
When youthful Follies die, which seem as mad:
If Age is subject to repent what's past,
Prudence and Experience redeems what's lost.
I perceive, Wife, the Muses have kept you company, although you walk by your self; but now I desire you will leave their company for a time, and entertain mine.
With all my heart; but the Muses are never with me, but when you are employed about serious Affairs: for though they are my Visitors, yet they are your Domestic Servants.
Dear Husband, where have you been?
My dear kind Wife, I have been in the Garden, where I have heard little Robin Red-breast sing.
That's a sign, Sweet-heart, we shall have warm weather, otherwise they would come into the House.
I had rather believe, my pretty Bird, we shall have cold weather: for they sing always in the coldest time of the year, as in the depth of Winter.
How ignorantly you speak, good Husband, as if the To∣bin Redbreast sings only in the cold Winter, and not in the warm Summer as well?
Why not, good Wife, as well as Nightingales, which only sing in the Spring, and Swallows in the heat of Summer?
That doth not prove that the Robin doth not sing in Summer.
I never heard the Robin sing in Summer.
Your never hearing of it, is not a sufficient proof.
It is to me.
To say it is, without a Reason, proves a Fool.
I only proved my self a Fool in marrying you.
I was accursed when first I gave consent to be your Wife.
You were easily won.
What, because I consented to a Knave that wooed?
You are a false woman, for calling me a Knave.
You are a Cuckold, for calling me false.
Am I so, Mistress? I will be sure to thrust my Horns tho∣rough your Heart.
Dam me, I'll kill her.
You'll be hanged, will you?
Nay good Sir be not angry.
Good Madam go away, until my Masters anger is passed over.
I will read this Letter once again, although it shakes my Soul, and makes me almost mad.
THe wrongs you have done me, are more than Heaven can give me patience to endure; for which wrongs, may thick black clouds of Infamy overspread your Memory; and may my Sorrows beat upon your Soul, as Northern Winds upon the Sea, and raise up all your thoughts in discontent, as raging billows, causing your voice to roar out loud with hideous noise, confounding all the Actions of your Life; and way your hopes be drowned in the salt water of despairing Tears. The Heavens can∣not condemn me for cursing a man which hath betrayed my Youth by Flattery, violated my Chastity by Proteslations, tormented my harmless thoughts with Perjury, disquiet∣ing my peaceable Life with Misfortunes. But the burden of my wrongs being too weighty for life to bear, hath sunk it to the Grave, where I hope all my disgrace will •e buried with me, though not the revenges of my Wrongs; for those will punish you when I am dead: For the Gods are just, although Mankind is not.
O Nick, what a Villain am I!
For what Sir?
For Perjury and Murder: for I did not only break those Bonds I had sealed with holy Vows, but my Falsehood hath killed a fair young La∣die: for she hearing I had forsaken her, and was to be married to another, she died for grief.
Alas Sir, we are all by Nature both frail and mortal: wherefore we must complain of Nature, of her Inconstancy and Cruelty, in making our Minds so changeable, and our Bodies so weak, the one being subject to Death, the other subject to Variety. But Sir, in my Opinion, you have no cause to grieve, but rather to rejoice: for what you have erred by Nature, you have repaired by Fortunes favour: for if that Lady which is dead, had lived, you would have been encumbered with many troubles.
As how Nick?
Why you would have been as a young Bear baired by two young Whelps; the forsaken Lady railing and exclaming against you in all Com∣pany she came into, and your Wife tormenting you with sharp words and loud noise, insomuch as you would have neither ear, drank, or slept in quiet. Thus both abroad and at home you would have heard noth gbut your own reproaches.
But shall not I be the same now she is dead, think you?
No faith Sir: for Death hath stopped the mouth of the one, and Kisses may chance to muzzle the mouth of the other; but if you be melan∣choly, your Lady will think you do repent, and will believe that you do pre∣fer the memory of your dead Mistress, before the enjoyment of your living Wife; besides, women are so jealous, as they will not allow their Husbands to think (that makes them talk so much as they do) for they think Thoughts are Bawds to Adulterous Actions, and that Imaginations commit Fornicate∣on with the Ghosts and Spirits of the dead.
Well Nick I will take thy counsel, and cast off melancholy, and be merry in Jovial Company.
What, are you sick, Wife?
I have such a pain in my Head, as I am not able to look up, or to speak.
You should take some Physic.
I cannot take Physic.
You must take Physic if you be not well; but pray have a care you do not catch cold, for that will do you hurt. But I must be gone about my several Affairs: wherefore God be with you wife.
Nan.
Madam?
Go make me a White-wine Caudle.
I shall Madam.
Madam, I am not come upon my own Score, but upon a new one: for I am entreated, or rather commanded by a young Gentleman to kiss your Ladyships hands, as from him who durst not come to do it him∣self without your leave.
Truly he shall never have leave from me.
He begs that your Ladyship would give him leave to be your admiring Servant.
He may admire without my leave; and I wish I had Merits; worth admiring.
By my Troth, Madam, he is a most sweet young Gentleman.
Hath Nature perfumed him, or Art?
Both, Madam.
That's too much, and will be apt to give the Head-ach.
O Madam, he is most desperately in Love with your Lady∣ship.
Pray Heaven, Madam, he doth not hang himself before my door!
Faith Madam, it is to be feared he will do some violent Act upon himself, unless you pity him.
Is he in distress?
As much as Love can make him.
How should I help him, Madam?
Nothing can help him but Love's Returns in kind Embrace∣mints.
Would you have me a married Wife, embrace an Amorous Lover?
O Madam, stolen pleasures are sweet, and Marriage is a Cloak to hide Love's meetings.
And can it hide the sin from the Gods, and the falsehood from my Husband, as well as from the World? But let me tell you, the World is quick-fighted as to Particulars, though blind as to the General, complaining against single crimes, yet never helps to mend them.
Faith Madam, the Gods easily pardon natural faults, and Hus∣bands dare not spy them, at least not to divulge them; and the World censures all the Virtuous as much as the Wicked, and the Chaste as much as the Wanton; besides, you are excusable, being married to an ancient man.
Doth Age deserve no Love?
Faith little: for Love wears out with Time, and Age wears out of Love; and if you said you did love your Husband, no body would believe you: for who can think you that are young and fair, can love a man that's old?
By Heaven I never thought my Husband old: for he doth appear to me to be just at Maturity; adorhed with all the Graces.
Surely you do not think his silver Hair Apollo's Locks!
No; but I think them Pa ass's his Head-peece.
Nor can you think his hollow Eyes, that's sunk into his Head, are Cupids golden Arrows?
No; but I think them Minerva's Loom, which hath inter-weav'd several Objects, making various and most curious works of Knowledge, and of Wit, where Judgment in the midst is placed, and Understanding bore∣ders it.
And can you think his shoulder, bent by weak old Age, are Cupids. Bow?
No; but I can think it's like a Bank swelled out by Generosity, to bear Necessities burdens on; or else a heap of Noble Deeds, fals'd by Heroic Actions, whereon Fame sits in Triumph, and blows his praise a∣broad, that all the World may hear it.
I will never believe you can think the surrows in his face,
ploughed up by Time, as smooth as waters be when in a calm.
No; but I can think them Tracks or Paths made by Experience, in which walks Prudence, Fortitude, Justice, and Temperance: And though you strive to make my Husband seem much older than he is, yet I believe that neither Time nor Age hath power over him: for to my sight his Skin is as smooth as Light, his Eyes as darting as Apollo's Beams, his Body is as straight as Serzes Wand, able to charm the youngest she, and turn her all to Love; his Strength is active, and his Spirits quick, to carry Arms, or sight his Enewies; and for his Brain, it is equally tempered, not burnt with heat, nor frozen up with cold; nor are his Sinews out of tune by flacken'd Nerves, but just set to Lifes Harmony, Strength strings the Cords, and Health doth keep just Time.
Ha, ha, ha, sweet Lady, your love hath made him a most Hey∣venly Creature.
Foul Devil, that seeks for to corrupt the Mariage-bed with false Dispraise, and flattering Insinuations, carrying fond Loves recommendations from Ear to Ear! Youth being credulous, they are soon received, which you perceiving, strait strive to sow in tender hearts Loves Amorous Passions, from whence Adultery doth grow, and Vices do increase. You a Lady, a Bawd. O that Honour, the mark of Merit, should be placed on such base subjects as you are! Be gone, such Bawds as you are not only able to decor∣der a private Family, but to ruin a whole Kingdom; you are worse than Witches, and do more mischief.
O that I had that power, to make her Husband so jealous, as he might hate her!
O Husband, I am a dead woman: for all my side is numb, nay in a dead Palsy, I cannot feel my Arm.
Heaven forbid: let me rub your Arm.
But Wife, if it were dead, you could not move it, and you can move it, can you not?
Yes, but very weakly.
Wrap it up with warm clothes, until such time as the Doctor can be sent for. Come into your Chamber, and I will send for the Doctor strait.
No, pray do not send for the Doctor now: for with your rubbing my Arm, you have brought the lively spirits into it again.
I am glad of it; but pray keep your bed.
My Lady doth not like her Caudle: wherefore she will have a Sack-posset made her.
Not like it? why she eat a great porringer of it:
That's all one, my Lady did not like it; and therefore you must make a Sack-posset,
What fault found she with it?
She did not express her particular dislike, but in the ge∣neral.
Well, I shall make her a Posit strait.
Heaven be thanked, my Master and Lady are perfectly friends again: for she sits in his lap, and he kisses her very lovingly. Lord, what a disquietous house have we had!
Hark, what noise is that?
Iuno bless us, I think they'll fling the house out at the windows.
Run, run Iane, they are fallen out again, and will kill each other.
O call the Chaplin to part them: for we shall never do it: Call him, call him.
O Trusty, where is my Master? my Lady is so ill, as we think she'll die: for she faith that she is in an Apoplexy.
If she were in an Apoplexy, she could not speak.
Hold thy prating, Fool: for hers is a speaking Apoplexy.
You are a Slut for calling me Fool.
You are a Knave for calling me Slut.
Am I so? there's for you for calling me Knave.
What in the name of Iuno is the matter? what Thieves are entered? or is my house on fire?
No Madam, only Roger and Join are beating one another.
May the Devil beat them for frighting me so.
My dear Wife, what is the cause you sent for me in such haste?
O Husband, I was dying of an Apoplexy, my Spirits were stopped, and my Brain was smothered in a cloud of gross vapours; but your Man and my Maid falling out, they fell a bearing each other, and she crying out for help, did so affright me, as I came running hither, thinking Thieves had broken in, or Fire had broken out of our house, which fright hath un∣stopped the Sluce-passages, and dispersed the Vapour.
I perceive a bad Cause may sometimes produce a good Effect, if their sighting hath cured you.
Yes; but I will turn away my Maid, for crying, and quarrel∣ling, and making such a noise.
That were unjust: for should the sick Patient, that had been sick to death, when he was restored to health, banish the Physician that re∣stored him, without a Fee? No, he ought to have his Fee doubled or trebl'd, so you ought not only to keep your Maid, but to double or treble her wages.
It were more just to treble my wages than hers; for I was the cause of the Out-cry: for when I beat her, she roared, and her voice thorough her throat, made as great a rumbling noise, as a foul chimney set on fire, and in my Conscience as much sooty phlegm fell from her head, as from a Cooks Chimney; and when she scolded, her words were so harsh, as they creek just so as when a door is taken off the hinges, which made my Lady strait ap∣prehend either Fire, or Thieves, or both.
No, you deserve nothing, by reason a man ought not to strike a woman.
Why Sir? she would sooner have been hanged about my neck, than have cried, if I had kissed her instead of kicking her.
Hold your prating, and learn to be civiller to women.
If I had kissed you, Join, as I perceive my Master would have had me done, you had been silent, and in your silence my Lady would have died, and then my Master had been a lusty Widower, and a free Wooer, and a fresh man, as one may say, where now he is bound to a sickly Wife; and this is the reason my Master would not increase my wages: which if I had kissed you, I had been enriched by my Masters favour: wherefore Join, I will kiss thee, but kick thee no more.
Go hang your self, it is too late now, you should have kissed me before.
You are a strange wench, to make the Posset-curd so tough, that now my Lady hath eat it, it lies so hard, so hard in her stomach, as it cannot digest.
Tough, say you? I am sure to my taste it was as tender as Cream.
Well, in my Ladies stomach it proves as hard as stone: wherefore you must go and burn some Claret-wine for her, with Cloves, Mace, and Nutmegs, and make it very sweet with sine loaf-sugar, presently, presently.
But if my Lady hath one meat after another so quick, she will not be able to hold all in her stomach, by reason her stomach must of necessity o∣verflow.
If the wine make her stomach to overflow, it will be like washing the mouth, and rubbing the teeth after meat, the which will scour her stomach clean.
Nay, if the stomach be not scoured and cleansed sometimes, it would be very foul, by reason it is so often used.
And if it be scoured too often, it will wear it out, as the Lear∣ned say: But Nan, go your ways and burn the wine, otherwise my Lady will chide.
Well Monsieur Amorous, now I have brought you to this Lady, I will leave you to make your Complements, the whilst I will go, Madam, to your woman, to Mistress Watcher, and chide her for not send∣ing me that you promised me.
She is much ashamed for her forgetfulness, and had rather die than see you.
Are not you well Sir?
A sudden passion hath surrounded my Heart, and hath surpri∣zed my Senses, sending out cold damp sweats over all my body.
Sir, will you drink any cordial water?
Lady, it was your Beauty that struck me with a trembling fear, and made my spirits faint; but this delicious kiss that I have taken from your hand, restores me more, and gives me greater strength than all the Spy∣ritz Chemists can extract.
I perceive now it was a dissembling fit, and not a real sickness.
Misconstrue not my Admirations and Affections, which do a∣door and worship you.
If we women should believe the words of men, they would make us more conceited of our selves than yet we are.
There are not thoughts to equal your great Beauty, nor words for to express it.
Madam, Madam, your Husband is coming, your Husband is coming.
For Venus sake stay by me, Madam, that my Husband may see I have a woman in my company.
Sir, my ambition grew impatient to be acquainted, and to ren∣der my self, and offer my service to you Sir.
Sir, I am your most humble Servant, and shall strive by all the ways I can to appear worthy your favours.
Lord, Lady Procurer, how are you dressed to day in a most careless fashion?
It is the mode, it is the mode to go undressed,
Wife, this is not a fit room to entertain this noble Gentleman, Sir, will you be pleased to walk into another room?
All rooms are fine Sir, where you and your Virtuous La∣die are.
Faith if I had not come running in before your Husband, he had caught you.
Faith Procurer, thou art such another Lady-wag, as all the Town cannot match thee.
I was, I was, but now I am grown old, I am grown old; but I was born to do good Offices.
I wonder my Lady is able to stay in the room with my Master: his vomiting hath so fumed the room, as there is such a stink, that by my troth I am almost strangled with the smell of the corrupted drink.
Alas poor Lady! she is forced to stay for fear he should be out∣ragious in his drunken humour: for if she stirs or speaks, he swears as if he would draw the Devils out of Hell.
Hell is not so bad, as to be where he is now he is drunk.
My Master is asleep, and my Lady would have you make less noise, and not to talk so loud, for fear you should awake him.
If he be asleep, we may make what noise we will or can make, he will not wake until such time as the fume or vapour of wine be out of his head, no sound can enter: But I wonder my Lady will take such care of him, when he hath no respect to her, but transforms himself from man to beast e∣very day; indeed she sees him only a beast, not a man: for before he is who∣lie sober, he rises to go to a Tavern to be drunk again.
If my Master transforms himself into a beast ere that he comes to my Lady, he imitates Jove: for he transformed himself into a Bull for the sake of seer Europe.
But not into a drunken roaring Bull as my Master is.
Faith if I were my Lady, I would hold by his Horns, and then let him roar, and drink• and whore as much as he will.
Yes, so she might chance to be drenched in a Bathing-tub, as Eu∣rope in the Sea.
So Husband, I perceive Nan is in your favour.
Faith Wife Nan is a careful and industrious Wench! for she strives to serve us both, for she makes you candles and feeds me with kisses.
Or rather Husband you feed Nan, and Nan feeds me.
Faith the truth is I •eed you both.
But Nan hath the greatest share, that makes her so proud, and I so sickly; But since you are so liberal to her, and so sparing to me, I will board elsewhere, and so as I may carve where I like best.
Sure Wife you will not.
Surely Husband I will do my endeavour.
What to be a Whore?
Yes, if being a whore will make you a Cuckold.
My Husband hath been a long time abroad, pray Jove he be safe, if he should chance to have a quarrel and fight, a hundred to one but he is killed: for otherwise he would have come home; do you think he is well Join?
You need not fear, for my master is of so civil a behaviour, and of so sweet a disposition, as he can have no enemies.
O But he is a man that is very valiant, and one that is very sensible of disgrace, and affronts.
Truly I believe you have no reason to fear.
Do you but believe so, nay then you doubt, and therefore I know he is killed and I will go and find out the murderer, and kill him my self.
My Noble Lady, do not run in this passion: for all the idle men, and women, and boys, and girls will run after you, as thinking you mad; for they make no difference betwixt melancholy, and madness.
I am not able to overcome this fear, I shall die.
Pray stay and send out one of our men to inquire where he is.
Call Roger Trusty.
O You defendant Gods assist my Husband.
Trusty go presently, and seek out your master, and bring me word where he is, and how he doth, and be sure if you see a grim looked fellow near him, that you stir not from your Master, but wait upon him home, for fear some treachery should beset him.
Who shall bring you word of his health, or sickness, life, or death?
Death do you say, O you have heard he is killed.
By Pluto I have heard no such thing.
Why do you talk of death then?
Because you send me to know whether he be dead, or alive.
That is true, wherefore let one of the Foot-boyes go a∣long with you to bring me an answer; but be sure you stay with your Master.
I shall.
Make all the haste you can to find him.
Is the Lady Procurer a Baud say you?
A perfect one I think: for she pleaded as earnestly, as Law∣years for a fee.
No doubt, but she hath as much reason: for sure she doth it for gain, not out of love to wicked baseness; but I believe poverty per∣swades her, or rather enforces her.
No surely, it is an inborn, or at least an inbred baseness: for neither death, nor torments can enforce, nor riches, nor preferrments allure a noble mind to such base acts; but some are so unworthy, or rather wicked, as to de∣light to entice, and to pervert all they can get acquaintance with.
And some doe it to hide their own faults, thinking to bu∣rye them under the vices of others, or smother them in the press of a mule∣titude: but let me advise you not to entertain her company any more.
I believe she will not visit me again.
Lord, Lord, this nasty love, or rather this heastly lust that doth corrupt all good manners, as gentle civility, free society, lawful recreations, honest friendship, natural affections; it cuts off the feet of obedience, it breaks the knees of duty, it wounds the breast of fidelity, it pulls out the heart of loyalty; it turns away prudence, it banishes temperance, and murders justice; it breaks peace and makes wars, and t•rns arms i••o petticoats. O sweet pure Chastity, how amiable thou art, how beautiful thou appearst in women, how heroic in men: for Chaste women have such innocent thoughts, such pure, clean, clear, white immaculate minds, such modest countenances, such gentle behaviour, such civil discourses, such no∣ble actions, such discreet entertainments, such cautionary recreations; o∣therwise they are bold, impudent, rude, flaunting, ranting, romping wo∣men: also Chastity in men makes them heroic, for propriety, justice con∣stance, and natural and honest love is the basis, pillars, or foundation where∣on true valour is built, when amorous affections make men effeminate, cau∣sing them to cast away their hard iron arms to lie in the soft arms of beau∣tie, and stops their cares from loud alarms, with charming notes of Music, it takes them from being masters of themselves, and others, and makes them become servants, and slaves; from commanding an Army to be com∣manded by single women, by whom he is checked like a school-boy, lead like a dog in a string, as after his mistresses humours, her frowns make him crouch like a cur, her smiles make him skip, and make face like a Jack a•∣apes, and their beastly appetites make them so rude, and wilde, as they re∣guard no civility of behaviour, no gentleness of disposition, no constancy of affection, they keep no friendship, constancy, or vows, they break all de∣cent customs, and disobey all honest laws; but this is a theme too wilde to be preached on.
Why Madam, my Lord your father may be a very chaste man although he lies with his maid, if he hath made her his wife before he made her his bedfellow.
His wife? he scorns the thought, and hates the act?
Pardon me Madam, if I offer to lay a wager of it.
Are you so confident that you dare lay a wager?
If you inquire more I believe you will find it to be true.
Who brought this letter?
A kind of a Gentleman serving-man.
Pray receive no more letters from that man.
He said he would come in the evening to receive an answer.
If he comes, tell him it needs no answer.
Husband, will you read a Love letter?
From whence comes it, and to whom is it sent?
You will soon find from whence it comes, and to whom it is sent.
So wife, I perceive I am in danger to be made a Cuckold.
Doth the letter beget your faith to that opinion?
But the praises, and professions this letter brings you, raises ••uples, and those scruples beget controversies, and those controversies may in time make a convert.
Rather a pervert Husband; but be you constant, and I will war∣rant you safe.
But Youth and Beauty wife, when they plead, are greater Bawds, and have a more persuasive power than the Lady Procurer.
Truly all three, as Beauty, Youth, or the Lady Procurer, rather than persuade me, would divert me, had I a wanton nature; as first, for the Lady Procurer her baseness appeared such as made me hate my self for being of the same sex she was of, and grieved me to see the follies of mankind, the one appearing like a Devil, the other like a beast, so seemed the Lover and the Bawd, when men have Reason to govern, as much as Appetite to per∣swade, the one proceeding from the Soul, the other from the body; besides, Virtue is the Natural Complexion of the Soul, not Vice: for Vice is bred, not born in man: As for Youth, it is so fantastical, extravagant, wilde, and self-opinionated, doing such ridiculous Actions, putting themselves into such affected Postures, as I might be as soon enamoured with a Jack-anapes: Be∣sides, the discourses of Youth are so flashy, as it gives the hearers no relish; and their Judgment is so shallow, and their Understanding so misty, as when Reason discourses with them, it is apt to be lost in the darkness of Ignorance. Lastly, for Beauty in men, it is worse than unhansomeness in women: for an ill-favour'd woman seems masculine, as if she had an Heroic Spirit,
though she were a Coward; to have a judicious Understanding, though she should be a Fool; to be Chaste, although she were Wanton; when on the contrary, a beautiful man appears Effeminate, Foolish, and Cowardly, when (perchance) he may be Wise and Valiant, yet it is Beauty makes him seem otherwise; and (for the most part) a beautiful man is more nice and curious about his person, as in his clothing, dressing, trimming, perfuming, powde∣ring, curling, and some will pomate and pain themselves, all which seems to me preposterous to men, insomuch as I could as soon be amorously affe∣cted with my own Sex, as those that are accounted beautiful men; and you might sooner be jealous of Age than Youth, with a Sun-burnt face and a wi∣ther'd skin, than a face that looks as if it had not seen the Sun, or the Sun it, nor felt the nipping Frost nor parching Wind; but I hope you have a better opinion of your self than to be jealous, as to think I can like any man better, or so well as you: And if you have not so good an opinion of me, us to believe I am constantly honest, yet I have such an assurance of my self, as to know I am not liable to be corrupted, and I am so Chaste, as I have not a thought subject to fully the purity of my chaste Mind and honest Heart.
I believe you.
What is the matter, Roger, that you are come?
And't please your Worship, my Lady hath sent me to know how your Worship is in health.
Why very well. How does she?
She's well, but that she's afraid your VVorship's killed.
If I were killed, I were past sickness or health. But who should kill me?
Nay that her Ladyship could not guess.
Return home to your Lady, and tell her I shall be with her within an hour.
I dare not leave your Worship: for she hath sent me to guard and protect you from all harm, and to fight in your quarrel, and hath sent one of the Foot-boys to bring her word how your Worship doth.
Go you and return back, and tell your Lady from me, that Ho∣nasty, Civility, and Courage, is a sufficient Guard and Protection; if not, then my Sword, and my Skill to use it, will fight, and maintain my quarrel.
If I should go home with that Message, you would find her dead at your return.
Why so?
Why, Sir, the very name of a Sword will kill her: I wonder your Worship should forget it, and knows her humour so well.
Yes, I know she hath a sweet Humour, and a tender Nature: wherefore return home without any more prating, and tell her that I am safe, and in very good health. Run all the way.
Wife, you may win me from the embracing of other women, if you have Discretion and Chastity answerable to your Wit and Beauty.
But I perceive men love variety; and if so, had I the Beauty of Venus, and the Wit of Mercury, the Wisdom of Pallas, and the Chastity of Diana, you would be like Iupiter still, and make love to mortals, which are common Wenches: But do not think I will do as Iuno did, as to torment my self with vexing and fretting for that which I cannot mend or help; but I will please my self with variety as much as you, and in the clouds of night will hide my Self and Lovers.
Faith Wife I shall dissolve your Clouds into showers of Tears, and strike your Lover with my Thunder-bolt, which is my Poniard: But Wife, let me advise you to be as you ought to be, a good Wife: for, as I will not encroach upon my Wives Prerogative, so Wife, you shall not in∣croach upon mine, being your Husband.
You will not give me leave to have the variety of Courting Servants; yet you will take the liberty of variety to Court several Mi∣stresses.
It is part of my Prerogative.
What, to have whores?
Yes; and its part of the Wives duty which she owes to her Hus∣band, to be content.
She is not bound to that duty.
She is bound to obey all duties: for the fundamental Laws in Marriage, are for the Husband to rule, the Wife to obey; the Husband to cherish, the Wife to love; the Husband to be Valiant to defend and protect her, the Wife to be Chaste, to suffer and submit; and when I leave to Com∣mand, you may leave for to Obey; when I leave to Cherish, you may leave to Love; when I am a Coward, you may be a VVhore: for when I base∣lie part with my Honour, you are not bound to keep it; but until I do part with my Honour, I charge you to keep it as you would do your life.
By these Rules married men are not bound to be constant.
Yes, to the Sex, but not to his Wife, in the case of Amorous Im∣bracements: for a Husband hath liberty for variety, but the Wife is re∣frain'd to one.
These are Laws that neither the Gods nor Nature have prescri∣bed, but only impartial men which make what Laws they please.
Nature taught men to make them for propriety-sake, and Gods command men to keep them, and that men should do their endeavour to force the Effeminate Sex to obey and practice them strictly, for the sake of Civil Commonwealths, wherein the Gods are best served.
But women are not such Fools, to be forced, such Asses, to bear such intolerable burdens of Troubles, Vexations, Crosses, and Neglects, from their Husbands and their VVhores.
Women are best pleased when they are made Asses.
Indeed Husbands make Asses of their VVives; but in faith you shall not make one of me.
My poor Lady sits so melancholy, and sighs and weeps, as it grieves my Soul to see her.
Can you blame her, when she and her children must go a beg∣ging, or sit and starve: for my Master hath sold most of his Estate at several times, and hath spent the money in Drink and VVhores, and hath lost it at play: and now he hath sent for all his Plate to play away, her Jewels were pawned before.
But when all is lost and spent, he will be forced to be a good Husband.
When all is gone, it will not be in his power: for none can be good Husbands as concerning Husbandry, when they have nothing to Hus∣band.
The best of it is, he will suffer as much as my Lady.
No faith: for he will rook, and shark, and cheat, and baud, to get a poor living, when she, poor Lady, must work hard for her Li∣avenge.
Alas she cannot work.
Then she must get some acquaintance, and turn Lady Bawd, and show Ladies how to dress themselves, and sell paint, pomatoms, wax-gloves, oyl'd-masks, and the like Commodities privately; or else she must pretend Skill in Surgery or Physic, and to make Plasters, Salves, Ointments, and the like, or make Cordial Powders, or Cordial Waters, and other wa∣ters and powders; then persuade old Ladies to take thereof, telling them those will make them look as young as one of fifteen.
But those things require cost to make them.
No faith, there requires not much charge: for Paint, Pom∣tom, and the like Commodities, will sell at any price, and will be made at a little charge: and for Salves and Plasters, and Oils and Ointments, Hogs∣grease, Turpentine, and Bole-Armonike, serves for all sorts of those things, and Bread, and Meal, and Milk, and some chopped Herbs, and Sallet-oyl, serves for all Pultesses; and for Cordial Powders, some hot Seeds, as Aniseed, Caroway-seed, Coriander-seed, and the like Seeds, with some powder of Liquoras, and beaten Spices, with some sorts of Gums, as Mystic, Myrrh, and the like, will serve their turn.
But Cordial Powders are made of Pearl, Amber, Coral, and the like.
Faith a little powder of posts serves as well: for they cannot be distinguished by their taste; but howsoever, it is but putting a grain of Musk and Ambergrease, and instead of Amber, Coral, and Pearl, it is but powdering some shaved Harts-horn and Chiny, and they will serve as well, and (per∣chance work as good Effects:) Indeed Cordial Waters are chargeable to
make: for they require fire to distill them; but there is some remedy for that: for it is but buying several sorts of ordinary hot waters, and mix them together, so as no one of the waters may predominate in taste, and it will pass for rare extracted Spirits, so as she shall never need to venture to distill, or lay out money, but just for the present to fetch it from those that sell Aqua∣vitae, Rosasolus, and the like, which may be had at a cheap rate, and she may sell them at a great price.
But what shall become of the poor young Children?
Why, he rooking, and she bawding, may make a shift to feed them with bread: and those two Trades will never fail as long as Mankind lasts: for VVhoring and Knaving will last till Dooms-day, or for ever.
But •rsly, my Lady hath given us warning to be gone: wherefore we must seek out new services.
My Lady is so good a Lady, as I wish I could serve her so as to maintain her, since she is not able to maintain a servant.
But since we cannot maintain her, nor she us, we must leave her.
O help me, help me, you merciful Powers, to destroy me, and let me not outlive my Husband.
It is like the Gods will hear your prayers: for ten to one my Ma∣ster out-lives you.
Why, is he alive?
Yes, and olive's like.
What makes you sweat so?
To bring you the good news of his well-being, and to prove the old Proverb a Liar, which says, Bad News hath wings, and good News no legs.
Where did you meet your Master?
In Westminster-Hall.
How did he look?
Healthful and well.
Did he seem angry or pleased, merry or sad?
Why he neither seemed angry nor pleased, merry nor sad, which I wondered at: for in Lawyers Courts, and places of Judicature, I never saw any face but was clothed with a merry green countenance, or a sad black countenance, or a red choleric face, or a pale malicious face; but my Masters face appeared like naked Truth, and clean Temperance, washed white with Innocence; being plump with health, and smooth with plenty.
But why did you leave him?
Why he commanded me so to doe, and to run every step, to tell you he was coming home, and I chose as the wisest to run, al∣though
I sweat for it, than stay and have a broken Head.
Well, I give you here a twenty-shilling-piece to dry your sweat with a cup of Sack.
May all my labours be rewarded thus.
I perceive you take the gift as a due reward, and not as my Ladies bounty.
Hold your prating: what need we thank the Gods, if Saints me∣rit Heaven?
Sir, I desire you would not think me undutiful to ask you a question: for I hope I am not so much in your disfavour, as not to re∣solve me, since it is in your power.
Well, what is it that you would know?
Whether you are married, or not?
What if I am? Marriage is lawful.
Yes Sir, but I doubt whether it be honourable or not: for it is said you are married to my Chamber-maid Dol Subtlety.
Perchance I am.
Then I desire your Lordship will let me marry too.
With all my heart, and I shall do my part towards thy mari∣age; but to whom would you be married?
Your Butler Sir.
Out upon thee base Girl, would you marry a Tipster?
Why Sir, a Tipster is as good as a piss-pot emptier; besides, they say you have done the fellow wrong: for she (they say) was his by pro∣mise, and if Conscience hath right, he ought to have her; and perhaps, did not Ambition come in the way, Affection might prevail: wherefore to gre∣tifie him, you ought in justice to bestow me upon him.
Well, because you shall not marry my Butler, I will not marry your Maid: for the truth is, I never had so low a thought. But let me tell you, it is in the way of disobedience to question a Fathers Actions, and a presumption for a Child to think their Father is not wise enough to govern himself; besides, Children were ungrateful to Parents, to desire that from them, which they cannot, or will not keep to themselves, as neither to suffer a Father to marry, or keep a Mistress: Do Children think a Father is bound to so many Children, and no more?
Sir, I dare answer for the part of Children, that they would be well content that their Father should have Mistresses, but they would be un∣willing and grieved that their Fathers should be their Mistresses slave, where∣by they incaptivate their Children, or ruin their Estates.
Well then inquire no more after any Mistress I shall have, un∣till you are incaptivated.

Sir Henry, by reason my Lady is gone abroad, I make bold to visit you.
I perceive I am obliged to my Wives absence for your Visit, Madam.
Faith, to tell you the truth, we women had ra∣there visit men when they are alone, than when they have company.
Then men and women agree better with particular, than with the general.
They do so, yet they love varieties best.
That's natural, for the Senses to delight in variety.
It is so, and yet our Civil and Divine Laws have forbid the use of Varieties, which (me thinks) is very unconscionable and unnatural.
But if some of the natural Appetites and Actions were not restrained by Laws, no Comman-wealth could subsist.
How did the Lacedaemonians subsist? they lived all in common; and had not all Greece been embroiled with VVars, their Common-wealth might have lasted to this day.
The Lacedaemonians had stricter Laws than the Common-wealth which we live in, and are of: for though they gave more liberty and free∣doom to some Actions than our Governments do, yet they were stricter in o∣theirs; and breakers of their Laws were more severely punished, even in the smallest breach, than the breakers of our Laws are almost in the greatest breach.
I am sure the Maker of the Lacedemonian Laws was a wise man,
and a kind-hearted man, in Decreeing for the Increase of Mankino, yet by some of his Laws he seemed but a Sloven: for he banished all curidsity and neatness, and I believe, many conveniences: Also he seemed to be a man of a weak stomach,
He rather seemed of a strong stomach, and a greedy appetite, by the course diet he brought men to live with; but (for my part) If I should judge of the Lacedaemonians Laws, I should judge that they strove to bring men to be like beasts, rather than to make them like as Gods, which men should strive to be.
By your favour Sir, there can be no Law that can keep men from being horned beasts.
Whose fault is that, Madam? not men's which make the Laws, but women's that break the Laws.
It is men's fault, for giving women such liberty: And let me tell you Sir, women are such subtle creatures, as they strive first to get an honou∣rabble esteem from their Friends and Husbands, and a belief of their Cha∣steady; and when they have secured men's jealousies, they make their Hus∣bands Cuckolds, which all their Neighbours perceive, although the Husband is blind and muffled with affection.
Madam, your Sex deserve a better Character than you give of them: for by your description there are few chaste.
Every woman knows the humours of her own Sex better than men know the humours of one another: wherefore let me advise you, Sir Henry Sage, to watch my Lady your Wife: for many, to my knowledge, seek for to corrupt her.
Madam, although she is one of your Sex, yet she is of an Angelical nature, and not corruptible.
Sir, I am your humble servant, and I wish your Angel may not fall from Virtue into Vice.
I have no jealous doubt, Madam.
I wonder at it: for wise men use to doubt.
Wife, I have given you warning twice, beware of the third time, that you receive no Masculine Visitors: for by Heaven, if you do, I will hang you up in my garters.
Do if you dare, I will have those that shall cut your throat.
You could not fright me with your Champions, were I a coward: for they are Carpet-Knights, and dare not fight.
They dare more than you dare.
By Heaven I'll give an Example to all men that love their Honour, and hate to be Cuckolds.
O Husband, Husband, spare me, spare me.
Wife, you may make me a Fool, but not unman me; you may flatter me, but not frighten me; you may make me commit an indiscretion, but never to be Effeminate.
O mercy, mercy, Husband, do but spare me this time, and I will be the best wife in the World.
Well, I will pardon you this time; and know, Wife, that though I am willing to part with my Breeches and Doublet to give them you, yet I will never part with my Sword and my Spurs, which is my Courage and my Management: And I will give you all liberty in Vanity, but not in Dis∣honesty; you shall keep the Purse, but not manage the Horse: Also let me tell you, that it is not enough to be honest, but you must give no suspicion to the contrary.
Come, Come Madam, are you ready? for Monsieur A∣morose hath provided a great and costly Banquet for you.
I am ready, I did only stay for you to go along with me.
But will not your Husband watch whither we go?
O no: for he believes I am going to the Lady Breeders Up∣sitting.
That's well be is so credulous to believe so easily whatsoever you would have him believe, and if he be but as obstinate of belief of that you would not have him believe you are happy, for let me tell you, that all men hath not that spiritual gift of Faith, but have strange opinions, and full of doubts, and suspicions.
Nay, I thank Jove, I have as good a Husband, as any woman whatsoever hath.
Prithee Madam leave some thanks for your loving servant, which loves, and adores you more than he doth Heaven, and worships you as his only Goddess.
He shall not pray in vain, nor shall I be as an Idol made of Stone, or Brass.
Come your ways then.
O man! O man! inconstant man! false and perjuri∣os man! flattering dissembling man! and the worst of Mankind is Sir Francis Inconstant! He hath not only forsaken me, but forgot me, drown∣ing the memory of me in his superfluous Cups. O Pluto, from whence all wickedness proceeds, make his fair Bride as false to him, as he hath proved to me, and sill his mind with furious Jealousy.
Who's there?
It is I, Husband.
I may bid you welcome, Wife: for you are a stranger here.
Truly Husband, I should not have disturbed you, but that I was afraid you were not well: for I came two or three times to the door, and heard no noise, which made me afraid you might be in a swoon, or dead.
I thank you for your loving fear and care of me.
You may think this is an over-fond humour in me; but I have heard of many that have been found dead in their Beds, and in their Closets, when as their Friends never mistrusted it, but thought they were asleep, or a• study, which if they had been found or known in time, they might have been recovered.
You say true Wife.
But now I know you are well, I will not disturb you any longer.
I will bear your kindness company.
Wife, thou art false.
It is strange to hear you say so, when but yesterday you made me such protestations of your Faith, believing I was Virtuous, Chaste, and full of Truth, which I did think Time had not power to alter your belief, and such Vows and Protestations of your Affections to me, as if the fire of Love within your heart did burn so clear, and flame so high, as nought could quench it out but Death's cold damps, yet not so much, but still a heat with∣in the ashes would remain.
I confess, Wife, my doubts of Love did make me to try, at least to say so to you.
True Love never makes doubts; and though you can dissemble with me, I cannot dissemble with you, could the Gods command me, as they cannot, things unjust.
I perceive you are angry, Wife.
No truly Husband, I am rather grieved than angry, to think my honest truth mistrusted: for Doubts are unjust to great Affections, true Love, and good Intentions; and Examinations are scandalous to a strict chaste life, and makes it seem as criminal: but could the World lay false∣hood to your charge, and should condemn you, yet my Affections would set you free, and rather tax my self for want of Merit to deserve your Love, than you want love to give Desert.
Prithee Wife be not grieved nor angry, for it is natural for Love to be suspicious: wherefore pray forgive my doubts.
My nature is to forgive, and not to bear a grudge or spleen in mind.
Then we are friends again.
My love is still the same, not to be altered.
Fool, How many degrees is there in Understanding?
Three.
Distinguish them.
There is a Celestial Understanding, a Terrestrial Understanding, and an Understanding betwixt both, as an Airestial Understanding: Those that are Celestial, are wise men; those that are Terrestrial, are fools; and those that are betwixt both, as Airestial, are half-witted men.
I thought you would have said that those that were Terrestrial, were beasts.
O no: for beasts are one degree above wise men, two degrees a¦bove half wetted men, and three degrees above fools.
But how will you make that good, that beasts are wiser than wise men?
By all their actions: for beasts (for the most part) are more endue∣strious, prudent, temperate, and peaceable, than the best of men; neither do they trouble their heads, nor break their sleeps, about the trifles of the World, but govern their Affairs easily, and live orderly, every several kind agreeing amongst themselves; besides, we are taught to imitate the Ser∣pent and the Dove, and Examples are Principles, and the Original is to be preferred before the Copy, the Sample before the Pattern. Thus a Beast is preferred before a Wise man, by reason all Men must learn of Beasts to be wise, and of Birds to be virtuously honest, as to be harmless.
Certainly Madam, you will starve your self with eating so little.
Why a little serves Nature.
Yes; but there are great differences betwixt Natures: for mankind requires more food than some kind of beasts or birds; for a man would be starved, if he should eat no more than a Dormouse, or a Chameleon, or a Sparrow.
But a Sparrow cannot eat so much as an Eagle, nor an Eagle so much as an Ostrich: Likewise, as it is with Bird-kind, so it is with Man∣kind, some would starve with that proportion another would surfeit on.
But surely there are none that could surfeit with your diet, as with Water and Air, nay (most commonly) nothing but Air, Camelion-like: for you oft times for a week together neither eat bit, nor drink a drop; and that which makes me wonder more, is, that you naturally have a very good sto∣match, and can eat, when you please, very heartily, and it thrives well with you; but my greater wonder is, that when you do fast, eating now and then a bit, week after week, nay month after month, yet you are not so lean, as to appear a Skeleton, nor so weak, but you can walk two hours without re∣sting, or being very weary.
Oh Custom is a second Nature, Join.
I would have your Ladyship accustom your self to live without eating, and then you will be set in a Chronicle.
Who would strive for that, since most think Chronologers are Artificers, and that their Chronicles are false.
Why some will believe it; and it were better to live in the memo∣rye of a few, than to die to all memory, and to live by nothing.
I would have my Fame live only by singular and transcending Merits, not by singular and melancholy Follies. I know my Errors, though I cannot mend my Faults.
Well Madam, you are to give me thanks for bringing you ac∣quainted with Monsieur Amorous: for he is as fine a Gentleman as any our Nation hath.
Indeed he is the most obligingst person as ever I met with; but pray Madam, what said he of me?
O he raves in your praise: He says you are the finest, sweetest, fairest and kindest Lady that ever was: but did not your Husband examine you when you came home?
No faith, not much, some slight questions he asked; but come into my Chamber, and there let us discourse of Monsieur Amorous.
I will make you humbler than to give me such unmannerly words. What had you to do in my Husbands, your Masters Chamber?
I went to speak with Tom my Masters barber.
What had you to do with your Masters barber? I am sure you had no use for him; but I will beat you so, as you shall not be able to stir, much less to go frisking into your Masters Chamber so often as you do.
What a Volley of words their gun-powder breath, and the fire-lock of their anger hath shot into my Ears, giving me no warning to barricade them up, but hath surprised my brain by their sudden assault, and hath blown up the Magazines of my Contemplations; but all creatures love to make a noise, beasts vocally, men verbally, and some actually in boyste∣rous deeds.
How now Fool, what's the matter?
Why this is the matter fool, thy Sister fool hath beaten her Maid fool, for kissing her Master fool.
For kissing her Masters fool, say you?
Nay by'r Lady, if she had done so, she had been wise: for if she had kissed me, she had not been beaten; but she did not kiss me, Ergo she's a fool.
Husband, why seem you so sad?
My love to you makes me sad.
To me? Heaven bless me, what do you see in me to make you sad?
Why for these passions and •rights that you fall into, like one in an Epilepsy, and now you look as pale, as if you were ready to fall down dead.
Alas Husband, consider it is a timorous effect of Love, which is to be pardoned, since it proceeds from the kindness I have to my Friends; it is honourable to the World, and no dishonour to you, but only trouble∣some to my self, and to those I naturally love, as Husband, Children, Father, Mother, Brothers, and Sisters: And though fond Love and vain Fears may be produced from the melancholy Spleen, yet those fears that proceed from my firm, true, and honest Affection, are created in the Soul: for noble, and honourable, and honest Fears, are the natural Issues of pure Love.
But Reason, the chief Magistrate of the Soul, and Governor of the Passions, should temper the Excess.
O Husband, when Love comes to be tempered, it loses or quit• the essential part, and the vertical strength: for true Love is pure like gold, which is debased with an allay.
But as Allay makes gold work better for use, so Temperance makes Love Happy for life.
Well Husband, I will strive to love with Discretion.
Pray do, and go abroad, to divert your melancholy, and eat as others do, that may have good meat and drink, and not live by the Air, as you do.
I shall obey you.
O Cupped, thou art a cruel Tyrant, making more wounds than remedies! And I am wounded so, as I am sick with Love, and
cannot live unless I am beloved again.
To make my Passions know, is all my care,
Lest he should love me not, is all my fear.
Sir Thomas Cuckold, Monsieur Amorous desires very much to make friendship with you: for he is so taken with your Civilities, and your courteous Demeanours when he was to visit you, that he swears you are one of the finest Gentlemen in the Kingdom: He says you are so gravely wise, so hospitably kind, and so generously free, as he honours you, and loves you with his soul.
I am his very humble Servant, and shall be glad, nay proud of such a worthy Friend as Monsieur Amorous.
Have you returned his Visit?
No; but I'll go wait upon him immediately.
Childrens eyes are always flowing,
Women's tongues are always going,
And men's brains are always musing,
And mans natures all abusing,
And mans life is always running,
And mans death is always coming.
Whose death is coming?
Yours for any thing I know: wherefore take heed; for let me tell you; Death is a rough fellow: for he pulls the soul out of the body, as a Barber-Chirurgeon doth a tooth, sometimes with less pain, sometimes with more; but many times Death is forced to tear the body, as a Tooth-drawer tears the jaw-bone, before he can get it out.
What Instruments doth Death draw out the Soul with?
Sickness, Wounds, Passions, Accidents, and the like.
But how came Death and you so well acquainted?
We are near a Kin: for Death and Ignorance are Cousin-Ger∣mans.
Faith thou art rather a Knave than a Fool, and a Knave is nearer akin to Life than Death.
Well, I am resolved to be Divorced from my Husband, for I cannot endure his tyranny any longer: for he will let me have my will in nothing, crosses and contradicts me in every thing.
Madam, we are taught to obey and humble our selves to our Superiors, and the Husband is the Master of his Family, the Governor of his Estate, and Ruler and Disposer of his Children, the Guide and Protector of his Wife.
Yes, he protects me well indeed, when he breaks my head.
May be your Ladyship doth provoke him with some unkind words.
What unkind words were they? I only said that Goos-quils made the best pens to write with, and he said no, that Crows-quils were better for that purpose: it is true, at last I returned as bad words as he flung at me.
Truly Madam, it is a great grief to your friends and servants, to see yoo live so disquietous together; besides, you torment your selves with your own anger.
That's the reason I would part: for I will never be a slave to his humour, I will rather choose to die first.
It were better we were parted, than to live in a perpe∣tual war together.
But Sir, is it not possible to temper your Passion?
No truly: for her words are so sharp, and pierce so deep, that they make me as furious as a wilde Boar that is hurt with a Javelin: And since she cannot temper her Tongue, nor I temper my Passion, it will be best for us to live asunder: for absence is the best and most certain remedy I can think of.
Have not you heard that my Master hath had a Quarrel, and is wounded?
Yes; and it is said he fought so valiantly, as he beat half a do∣zen lusty men, and followed them so close, as they were forced to take shelter; and I have also heard, that one of them he beat, swears to be re∣venged.
But if my Lady hears of it, she will run mad, or die.
O no, my Lady (Join says) hath left those follies, and is be∣come discreet.
Discreet? what is that? to be ill-natured, as not to care if her Husband or Friends be killed?
O yes, so much to care, as to pity them, and be sorry, nay sad, if they should be killed; but not passionately to drown themselves in tears, or to let their grief feed on their life, and die.
O my sweet Amorous!
O my dear Cuckold, the delight of my Life!
Faith Amorous I have been to seek you all the Town over, and my Lady Procurer met me, and sent me to the other end of the City, telling me you were at the Horn-Tavern.
Why do you not know her humour? she will serve you twen∣tie such tricks: for she is the veriest Wag in all the Town, although she is in years.
Well, if I be not even with her, as very a Wag as she is, let me be condemned for a fool.
O Madam, my Master is coming home, being wounded in a Duel.
Help, help, my Lady, my Lady.
What's the matter?
My Lady is killed with the report of my Masters being hurt.
It were fit you should be punished for telling her of it.
Take life again: for my Master is not so much hurt, as to be in dan∣ger of Death.
Do you speak this as a known truth, or for to recover me?
As a truth upon my Conscience, Madam.
Then I charge you do not discover my Passion.
We shall not.
Go, and give charge to my Footmen, that none of them run home to tell my Wife of my hurt, for fear of frighting her: for if she hears I am hurt before she sees me, she will apprehend me worse than I am, and that may kill her.
Sir, she hath heard of it already.
Rogue that he was that he was that told her: who was it?
It was I Sir, when I went to fetch your Leaguer-cloak to keep you warm.
Villain, I'll run you through.
What you please Sir; but my Lady takes it very patiently: for
when she heard of it, she was playing on the Lute, and did not leave playing at the report.
I am glad she is so discreet.
Truly Sir I think my Lady is now one of the wisest and discreetest Ladies in the Town.
What, for playing on the Lute?
No Sir; but for being so patient and temperate, as all wise persons are, who bear afflictions with that Moral Philosophical Carelessness, and (as they call it) passive Courage, composing their Faces into a Grave, surly Countenance, fashioning their Behaviour with Formality, walking with a slow and stately Pace, speaking nothing but Wise Sentences, and Learned Morals.
You are a moral Ass; and although my wounds are but small, yet I grow faint with standing to hear a fool talk.
Sir, I believe you may wonder, and think it strange, that a woman can love a stranger so soon and so much.
I doe not think it strange in Nature, but I think it strange you should affect me, a person which is no way worthy of your Favour and your Love, unless you (like a Deity) humbly descend to mortals, accepting of their Adorations and Offerings: And, as a mortal to a Deity, I offer up my Heart on the Altar of your Obligations.
Here I do vow to Venus, not only to offer you my person, and all delights that it can yield, but I offer you my Honour, my Fathers Honour, my Husbands Honour, nay their lives, if you require it.
I must confess your Husbands life is dangerous, for we cannot well enjoy our loves with safety, if that your Husband lives.
Name but the way unto his Death, and I will execute it.
I cannot; for you must do it as you find Fortune gives you op∣portunity.
Farewell and believe, I shall let no opportunity slip, that might bring my designs to pass.
My revenge is too big for words, all actions to little for his pu∣nishment: wherefore you furies, I invoke you to assist me, and if Hell gives me not help, Heaven or Death give me ease.
Now Monsieur Amorous, you and the Lady Wanton shall not need to make so many excuses to meet, for your going into the Country, with Sir Thomas Cuckold, you will be always in the House with his Lady.
Faith, I have a great deal of business in the City, which may suffer, if I should go out of the Town.
Out upon you, make excuses already.
I do not make excuses, I only tell you the truth of my affairs.
Can you have any affairs greater, or of more concernment, than waiting on a Mistress, and such a Mistress as you were a dying for to enjoy, but a little time since? well go thy ways Monsieur Amorous, for thou art like a woman that hath fits of the Mother, often swouning and sick, but never dyes in any of them.
The Lady Chastity would be like a draught of cold water, to bring me to life again.
Let me tell thee, as those fits will never kill thee, so all the Cha∣steady in the Town can never cure thee.
Pray Iuno, my Husband doth not perceive I have cried.
You need not fear it, for the hot Cloth you laid to your eyes hath so•'d out the redness, and abated the swelling thereof; but I doubt you will cry when you see him.
I hope I shall be wiser, than to cry; for I would not have my Husband think me a Fool, or troublesome, for the world.
But surely Madam, you must needs torment your Soul, to strive so much against nature.
Love had rather torment it self, then torment what it loves.
Your Ladyship will make the old Proverb good, which says, love overcomes all things, and surely it overcomes all when it overcomes nature it self.
Prethy Fool watch thy Master, and my Maid Nan, and when they are together give notice, and I will give thee a new Coat.
I shall stand Sentinel, and give the watch-word.
Most Creatures their tails lies in their heads, or their heads lies in their Neighbours tails, nose to breech; for they are always thinking thereof; which makes their thoughts as sluts and slovens, their brains like to a heap•up Dunghill; but I must watch, my Master and his Maid to catch.
It is strange, that Sir Humphrey Disagree, and his Lady, cannot agree, yet they are both of good natures, and generous Souls; keep a noble House, and are bountiful to their Servants, kind and courteous to their Friends, and he a very understanding Gentleman, and a learned Scholar, and an honest Man.
And she is a very Chaste Lady, a good Huswife, and very or∣dearly in her House, as concerning what she is to take care of, or to direct, and is very pious and devout, and yet both to be so indiscreet as to fall out about light toys, and frivolous matters.
It is strange, and truly great pity; wherefore, we ought to do our endeavour, to try if we can make them friends.
Surely that might be easily done; for they are as apt, and as soon friends when their anger's over, as they are apt to fall out when they are friends, and I make no doubt to make them friends; but the business is to keep them friends, and the question is, whether it were not better they should be parted friends, than present enemies.
Yet we have discharged our parts, if we make or do our in∣devour to make them friends.
Well Sir, persuade the Husband, and I will try to persuade the Wife.
Sir, you do amaze me; for I have not been so long married as to give her time for Incontinence, nor have I been so ill a Hus∣band as yet, as to create, or beget her hate towards me.
Sir, if I do not prove it, I shall be content to suffer the heaviest punishment you can inflict upon me; and because your belief is wavering, I will place you, where you shall hear her declare her intentions, as towards your Death.
I long to prove the Truth.
Prethy my Lady Procurer, go into the Country with us, since we shall have such good Company this Summer, as Monsieur Amorous, we will be so merry, and have such sports and pastimes, as you shall not repent your journey.
Faith Madam I cannot; besides, you have no use of me now.
I am not as many others are, that when they can make no more use of a friend, they strive to shun their Company.
Well, if I can go with you I will; but I doubt I cannot, at lest I cannot stay above a week, or such a time with you.
Nay, if I once get you there, I will make you stay.
What a troublesome life is a Married life, bless me Heaven, who would Marry?
That would you if you could get a Husband; for Maids long to be Wives, and Wives longs to be Widows, that they might Marry again.
That is, because Maids do not know the vexations of Marriage, which Wives do.
Faith Women take a pleasure in being vexed, crossed, and injured; for then they have a ground for their anger, and revenge is the sweetest, and dearest employment they have, or would wish to have; otherwise, they would be dull, and idle without it; and to prove it, Widows are as •arae••, and industrious to Marry as Maids, and all is, because they would be vexed and crossed.
And are not men as desirous, and hasty to Marry as Women?
Yes, those that are Fools.
Why then you should marry, if any Woman would have you.
Such Fools as I, never, or very seldom Marry, for though we are Christened Fools, we were Born Wise (where other men were Born Fool•, but Christened Wise) as bearing the name of Wise and understanding Men, so as they have only the name, but not the wisdom; the Truth is, we Fool, and other men are fooled.
Then Women are Born Wise, for they Fool Men.
Nay saith, poor Souls, they are for the most part double fooled; first, thinking they fool, and then in being fooled.
Mistress, my Lady is very angry, that you let your Lute-Master stay, whilst you talk to the fool; she says you will be as much a fool as he, with talking so often with him.
Tell my Sister, I shall learn more good from the fool, than the sidler.
Mark you that Maid.
I mark that Children and Fools keep company together.
And the Maids and the Master.
Alas my poor Lady looks as if she would drop to the earth, so pale and ill.
How should she be otherwise, for she smothers in her grief, and dares not discover it; and then she seldom sleeps, or eats, or drinks: and is so restless, as she cannot sit still, but walks about her Chamber.
O Master Doctor, what do you think of my Husband, I hope he is in no danger, is he?
I dare assure you Madam, he will be very well again; for he is only weak and faint with loss of blood: for he taking the wound to be slight, did not take care to stop it soon enough, whereupon his Spirits with his blood issued out so much, as makes him so weak, as you see he is forced to keep his Bed.
But Doctor, Spirits is life, and if he wants the one, he must soon lose the other.
It is true, if there were no Spirits left: but let me tell you Madam, there is more danger when the Body hath too many Spirits, than when there is but a few; for many Spirits make the Body too hot, by giving the Pulse too quick a motion; which quick motion, fires the heart so much, as the blood becomes boiling hot; which Parboils the Liver, and the rest of the vital parts, and melts the fat, wastes the flesh, and weakens the Sinews, or Nerves, as being boiled as to a soft, tender, quaking Jelly; that is the cause that the Sick is so weak they cannot stand, having not that tough strength in their Sickness, and some after their sickness; and shall continue weak, until such time as the Sinews, and Nerves grow harder, and tough again; and many times from the boiling blood there arises such gross, and so many Vapours, which Vapours is Smoke, as they stiff•le the life, or at least disquiet the Brain.
But will you assure me Doctor?
As far as Human skill can assure you I will.
Fair Iuno hear me, send to thy Brother Pluto, to imprison Death in his dark Vault, or at least for to forbid him to touch my Husband; and fair Goddess, send health to raise his weary limbs from off his hated Couch, if not, give order to grim Death to strike me too; for thou hast power on all, as being chief in power.
Madam, my Master desires you would be pleased to come to him.
I will not only make me a Garland, but a Bower of Willow, where I will sit and lament all forsaken Lovers; nay, I will sit and Curse so long, till I have laid those Curses so thick together, as nei∣there sighs, nor tears, nor prayers, shall dissolve them.
I am come to bring you good news, Monsieur Amo∣rous.
What is that my comfortable Lady?
The Lady Wanton is come to Town.
Pluto.
What do you swear, because she is come to Town?
No I swear, because I must go out of Town.
I hope you will not go out of the Town, now she is come to town.
Alas my occasions are such, as I shall be utterly ruined if I stay.
Then let me tell you, the Lady Chastity begins to listen to your Suit.
And is there hopes I shall enjoy her?
I cannot tell.
Nay Dear Lady, speak some comfort?
It is a solly, if you must go into the Country.
Neptune shall swallow the Country, rather than I will endanger to lose a Paradise.
But if you stay, you will be ruined.
I rather shall be ruined if I go, for now I have considered it, I find, I have such potent affairs here in the City, as they will force me to stay.
O Iupiter! how Inconstant is Mankind; for what they have enjoyed they despise, and what they cannot get, they earnestly desire, and are restless in the pursuit.
What say you?
I say you are an unthankful Man, and not worthy of a Ladies favour, as to forsake her that loves you, and seek her that hates you; for know, the Lady Chastity scorns your Suit, despises your Person, and hates your Humour.
Pluto take all your sex.
If he should, you would whiningly follow them to Hell, rather
than miss their Company, refusing Heaven, for effeminate Society.
They torment men more than Devils do.
Now Sir Humphrey Disagree and his Lady are made good friends, they are become a loving Couple.
Heaven keep them so.
Truly I begin to believe they will; for they seem very sense∣ble of their errors, and they laugh at their one follies, to see, what ridicu∣lous, frivolous, and small matters, their quarrels are built with, and upon.
Look you Wife, here is the Priest that hath new married us, and our friend that hath joined us in a loving friendship again.
And I will celebrate this Union with a Feast, to which, I will invite my good friends as to my wedding day.
I perceive we shall be merry, pray let us have Fiddlers, and Dance.
That we will.
Come, come Wife, you are not so kind as you were wont to be; for you did use to watch my looks, my sleep, and how I fetched my breath in my sleep, and what I did eat, and how much I did eat, for fear I should be sick, and no help unsought to cure me: But I perceive you are as all other women are, inconstant; for now you do neglect me, and seldom come near me but when I send for you.
I dare not, for fear my diligence may prove loves indiscre∣tion, and so my service become a burdensome trouble.
You Cowardly Rogue, do you take the advantage of sick∣nos to work your revenge, do you come when my Husband is not able to defend himself?
Killed? if you had a thousand lives, my single life would kill them all, rather than suffer my Husband to be murdered.
You Company of dull dead statues, move for shame, and bear away this Villain, this murderous Villain.
Where should we carry him Madam?
Why any where, cast him into a Ditch, there let him lie and rot, like Beasts without Butiall.
Carry him to a Justice, and bid the Justice dispose of him as he thinks fit, telling him of his crime.
Let us search him, to see if he hath never another Pistol.
Go you Cowards, and carry him away.
O this effeminate sickness hath disgraced me; O how like a worm a sick man is, which lies so low, and is so shiftless, that any beast treads out his life?
Why, had you been in health and strength, it would have been no Honour to beat a Coward.
He seemed not such a Coward, but that he had some courage, or otherwise he would not have adventured himself alone into a House, wherein were many persons, which would have been his Enemies; but I am glad that you have the honour of his wounds, but it is a miracle to me, to see how valiantly you did behave your self, and yet by nature is so fearful.
Mistake not Love; for true Love is only a afraid when it cannot help, but when it hath hopes to rescue what it loves, Mars is not More valiant.
Well Wife, I owe my life to your love, and I shall account you as Pallas, that hath defended me with a prudent courage.
If you think I have done you service worthy a reward, pray give me a request.
That I shall, if it be that life you have defended, what is it?
It is to set love free from the Chains of discretion, and Joe∣ler of temperance; for it is impossible to confine love, but either it will die, or break out in revenge.
Well Wife, hereafter I will never oppose loves ways.
Sir, did you hear what your Lady said?
Yes, I heard her say, she would poison me in a mess of broth.
What will you do to prevent it?
Leave that care to me, I shall be my own Sentinel, to discern the approaching Poison.
Their Deaths will be my triumph, and my Death a re∣prieve.
I am come to invite you to a Collation, for the Lady Wanton, for whom you at first made costly Collations, is forced to invite you now to the like.
Faith Madam, I am so squezy stomached, that the very sight of a Banquet will put me into an Apoplexy, as with an obstructed Surfeit.
If you should deny her, you would lose you reputation amongst our Sex for ever.
Well I will go, upon condition that you carry a message from me to another Lady.
Most willingly, so it be not to the Lady Chastity.
Prethy Fool give me advice, as how to choose a Husband.
Faith you are wise to take a Fools Counsel; for Fools have for the most part, best Fortune, either in their Counsel or Choice.
Why, are Fools Fortunes favourites?
Yes, for by Fools Fortune plainly shows her power, when wise men usurp it, striving to take her power from her.
Then Fortune direct thee, to direct me.
Fortune is giddy, and directs by chance, which causes so many misfortunes.
Then by your direction, I may be unfortunate; but I will venture, wherefore tell me how to choose.
Why then, you must choose a Husband by the Ear.
By the Eye you mean.
No faith, those that would be happily matched, must choose a Hus∣band, or Wife by the Ear, and not by the Eye: for though report is oft-times false, yet it seldom flatters; nay for the most part, it is so far from go∣avenge merit its due Praises, as it detracts therefrom.
But Fortune carries worthless men upon the tongue of fame.
It is true, but Fortune being giddy, is apt to stagger, and so to stum∣ble, and oft-times flings those worthless men in soul disgrace.
But hopes and fears, bribe or force the World to praise a worthless He, or She.
It is true, hopes of gain are bribes, and fear of punishments are threats, for to persuade, or force the tongue to flatter; yet none but Gods and Kings, are subject to this flattery, and you are not to marry, either the one, nor yet the other; for Gods join not to Mortals, and Kings are far too proud to marry Subjects; nor were it good for you, if that they would, as that you were matched to a King: for happiness lives in equality.
Faith thou art too wise to wear a Fools-Coat; wherefore cast it oft.
And faith I should be more Fool than my profession makes me, if I should cast it off; therefore I will keep it on.
O my Dear love, I have such an opportunity, that For∣tune could never have given me a better; for my Husband is fallen Sick, and if I Poison him now, the World will say, and think it was his Sickness that killed him, and that will secure me.
I he be Sick, perchance he may dye, and that will save you the labour, and hazard of poisoning.
O But if he should recover again, then I were undone; where∣fore I will not venture to rely upon his Sickness.
Use your discretion, but tic not fit we should be seen together; wherefore, I will kiss your hands, and leave you for a time.
And I hope the next time we meet, we shall be rid of the obe∣structor of our loves:
Madam, did you give Monsieur Amorous the present I sent you to give him?
Yes, there was Shirts, Caps, and Handkerchiefs, of each two dozen.
There were so.
They were of the finest Holland, and Flanders Lace, that ever I saw, what might the present cost you?
Not much above five hundred pounds.
You speak as if it were but a slight present, but if your Husband knew of it, he would think it were too much by four hundred ninety and nine pound nineteen shillings eleven pence halfpeny farthing.
But what said Monsieur Amorous, when you presented that pre∣sent, as from me?
At the first he would not receive the present, saying it was too costly, and that he could not return enough thanks for it, and so should seem as ungrateful against his will; but at last upon my persuasion, he took your present, and to Morrow he will come and give you thanks.
I had rather meet him in some other place, than receive his visit at home, where my Husband is.
Husband, how shall these Children live?
By Heavens Providence Wife.
I fear they will starve, unless your providence feeds them.
It was imprudently done to get them.
But now they are got, they must be provided for.
Yes, as Beggars provide for their Children, put them to the Parish.
The Parish will not keep them.
Then sell them to Animal Merchants, they will Traffic with them into the Barbados, or Barmudes, or Virginy, or the like places.
And how shall I live?
Why you may go along, and be their Nurse.
And the Merchants Whore.
As you can agree; for he may sell you at as great a prize after, as if you were honest; besides, your Children will prove you to be fruitful, for which, they will give a double, or treble price for you; and if you thrive send me word, and I will come to you, if I cannot live here.
I thank you Husband, for you have made me miserably unhappy, by your mispendings, yet you would feed upon my good fortune, if it can be called good fortune, to thrive with dishonesty.
Faith Fortune hath undone me; but may be she will be chari∣table to you.
I hope so, for Fortune never befriends those whom Vices be∣sots, and though your deboysteries have undone you, I hope my Virtues will help to save me.
But I never perceived your virtue to do you any good, but for any thing I perceive to the contrary, you are like to starve, for all your virtues.
I hope when I am parted from you and your wickedness, Heaven will power down some mercy on me.
Pray Madam inform me where Monsieur Amorous is, for I have sent two or three times to his Lodging, and my Messenger is an∣answered still he is from home.
He is a wanderer.
I think he is wandered into some other parts of the World, for after he went from us, I sent a dozen Letters, whilst I staid in the Country, and received not one answer.
Faith Madam Monsieur Amorous is one of the lasiest of Mankind.
I am resolved when I see him to chide him, for I could not con∣veniently do it when he came to give me thanks for my present.
Sir Thomas Cuckold, you are welcome to the Town, for though I have had the Honour to see your Lady two or three times, yet I could not got a sight of you never since you came out of the Country.
My Wife did wish for your Company whilst we were in the Country, a hundred times.
I should be glad to be in any place, to do my Lady Service.
I was abroad even now, where I met Monsicur Amorous, who looked upon me as if he knew me not, or rather as if he did despise me.
Perchance he did not know you.
His memory must be very short, if he could forget me so soon.
Perchance Husband you looked strangely upon him.
Truly Wife I went to embrace him, as I was used to do, with kind love, and he crossed the street to shun me.
I dare lay my life it is some mistake Husband.
Friends (Sir Thomas) must never be exceptious.
I am not apt to be exceptious, I will assure you Madam no Man is freer from that humour than I am.
This feigned Sickness shall serve as a snare, to catch my Wives design.
My dear heart how are you?
Very Sick, so Sick as I fear Heaven doth envy my happiness, and will part us by Death.
The Gods forbid! I hope you will live so long, as to Crown your Virtuous life with aged years.
O no, I find my life draws towards an end, and Death will separate us from each other; but you being young Wife, will soon for∣get me, placing your love upon some other Man, in whom, all the remem∣bronco of me will be buried.
Dear Husband speak not so Melancholy; your words strike such terror into my heart, as I cannot endure to hear them, I had ra∣there Death should strike me, than you; Dear Husband, cheer up your self, your Disease is only Melancholy; wherefore take such nurishing things, as may give your Spirits strength and life; shall I bring you a little Burnt Wine, to comfort your Spirits, or some Jelly broth to strenghten your Stomach?
If you please Wife.
Now for the poisoned Draught.
Here my dear heart, drink this.
What mean you Husband to lock the Door?
Because none shall enter, until the Broth be drunk Wife.
No Wife, you must not go out, for I mean to nourish you with that Broth that you would have nourished me with.
Why Husband I am not Sick, I do not require Broth.
O yes Wife, your Soul is Sick, although your Body is well, and this Broth may perchance cure the one, although it kills the other; wherefore drink it.
I will not.
You shall, and if you drink it not willingly, I will force it down you throat.
Dear Husband spare me.
Why, I give you nothing but that which you prepared for me, and if it were good for me, it is good for you.
Dear Husband have mercy on me, and I will confess my crimes.
No Wife, no more mercy than you would have had one me, and therefore drink it:
It is Poison Husband.
That is the reason you shall drink it Wife.
Dear Husband, let me live but to repent my sins, which like a black thick cloud do cover all my Soul.
This will be a sufficient punishment, for if you be pu∣nished in this World, you may escape the punishment of the next.
Good Husband consider youth, that is apt to run into er∣rors, not being guided with good Counsel, as it ought.
I will consider nothing, and therefore drink it, or by Heaven I will force you to it, and therefore linger not.
You Gods forgive me my crimes, and let this deadly draught purge clean my Soul from sin.
Now Wife have you any Amorous desires to Monsieur Disguise.
No, the fire of my unlawful love is quenched.
Ha she is dead, what hath my furious passion done, I was too sudden to crop her tender life so hastily, without more strict exa∣minations; for it was likely thus spruce Gallant corrupted her with his al∣luring
looks, and smooth enticing words, which he knew well how to apply; and youth is credulous, and women soon persuaded, and being joined in one they easily are overcome. I do repent.
I will revenge my self of those that were the cause.
Where is Monsieur Amorous that he comes not with you, you said you would bring him with you?
Faith he desires to be excused, for he saith he is not well.
This is but an excuse, for he hath made an hundred within this week; but since he doth neglect me, I will have another that shall be more constant.
You are wise Madam: for since men are so various as they are, women would seem but fools, should they be constant.
Well then Madam, you must do me a favour, for since I became acquainted with Monsieur Amorous, upon your persuasion, you must con∣trive a private meeting for me and another Gentleman, upon my per∣swasion.
Sweet Lady, you do oblige me to employ me in your Service.
O Ursely, I am glad to see thee with all my heart.
Truly Join, so am I to see you.
When did you hear of our good Lady, the Lady Poverty?
It was not long since I saw her.
And how doth she live poor Lady?
Why she lives privately, but is likely to live happy enough; for let friends have now taken care of her and her Children, upon the condition that she will receive no visits from her Husband, but banish his Company; left he should increase their charge with more Children; neither will they allow him any thing.
By my trath he doth not deserve any maintenance; but I am glad she is provided for, being a shiftless creature for her self and Children, but where do you live Ursely?
Why I live with an old Widower.
And I with a grave Matronly Widow, wherefore let us endea∣four
to make a match betwixt them, that so we may live once again in a House together; for you and I were always dear friends you know.
It is true Iane, but as you are my friend I must tell you, I should be an ill friend to my self, if I should persuade my Master to marry.
Nay if it be so Ursely, make the best of him; and if thou wilt show me where thou duellist, I will come and visit thee when I have leisure.
Come with me, and I will show you where I live.
Wife, where are the Fiddlers that you promised we should have.
I did forbid them to play, until such time as we had half dined, for their scraping would hinder our eating.
Pray wife let them come in, for I love my meat should dance in my mouth, my teeth keeping just time to the tune; and the Music will make my meat turn nimbly in my mouth, and will heat my cast to a high gusto.
The noise that they will make, will take away my Stomach, and will make my head ache; besides, no body will hear one another speak, neither will our Servants hear what we call for.
It will make our Servants the more diligent, for Mu∣sick will revive their Spirits, and will make them agile; wherefore pray Wife let them come in and play.
No pray Husband let them alone a little while longer.
If you keep them out until our Stomachs be full, we shall be so dull and heavy with the vapour of the meat, as it will not be in the power of Music to move our minds to mirth, or so drunk with Wine, as the Music will make us mad.
I hope you will not be mad before you are drunk.
No Wife, I will be merry before I am drunk, where∣fore Servants call them in.
Let them alone.
I say they shall come and play, and therefore call them in.
I say they shall not come in, nor play, therefore forbid them.
Surely I will be Master, and therefore they shall play.
Surely I will be Mistress of this Feast, and therefore they shall not play.
Call them.
Let them alone.
They shall come and play.
They shall not play.
Lord there is such doings within, as it is wonderful, my Master swears, my Lady cries, and rails, and rails and cries.
in truth it is a sad Feast, and I was joyed to think how merry we should all be.
And I pleased my self to think, what good cheer we should have, and what dainties we should eat.
Why, so you may still.
No Faith in this Hurlyburby every one caught who catch could, that all is vanished, and purloined away in this disorder.
Come let us go, and see whether they can agree or not.
That they can never do, so long as the sound of their tongues is within the distance of their Ears; besides nature hath not matched their dis∣positions, or humours.
You say right, intrude their Souls are mismatched, and therefore it is impossible they should ever agree.
Sir my Wife your Mistress is Dead.
No Sir, my Mistress and your VVhore is Dead.
You are a Villain to corrupt her.
You are a Villain to marry her.
Draw, for either or both of us Villains shall die.
I fear not Death nor you.
Justice defend the wronged, and take my part.
Heaven is just, to punish perjury with violent Death; O my Conscience, how it stings me at my Death, with the remembrance of the wrongs I did my first love.
Do you know this Face, or have my sorrows disfigured it so much, as you cannot call it to remembrance?
You powers above, affright not my fleeting Soul with visions, but let it gently pass, and leave my body to the silent grave.
You Spirit divine, take not revenge; for I am truly sorry for the wrongs I did thee in thy life.
I forgive you, and know I am no Spirit, and though I cannot say I live, because I am dying, yet I am not dead, and that Letter I brought you, was to disguise me the more by a false report; but I have acted the design of my Travel, which was to end my life with yours, for since I could not enjoy you in life, I desired to embrace you by Death, and so I shall.
O my Soul make haste and follow hers.

The Lady Natures Daughters are the only Ladies that are admired, praised, adored, worshipped, and sued to; all other women are despised.
We may go into a Nunnery; for we shall never get Servants, nor Husbands, as long as they live.
Why there are but three of them, and three women cannot serve and content all the men in the World.
No, but they may discontent all the men so much, as to make them all to be Male-contented Lovers, who will reject all, because they can∣not have what they desire.
Let us make a Faction against them.
Alas what Faction against them, can hurt and destroy Love, Wit, and Beauty?
Jealousy will weaken Love, Dispraise will disgrace Wit, and Beauty, Time will soon bring that to decay.
But Jealousy cannot weaken true and virtuous Love, nor Dis∣praise cannot disgrace pure Wit, nor Time cannot decay the Beauty of the mind; wherefore all the faction you can make against them, will do them no hurt; besides, you will be condemned by all the Masculine Sex, if not pu∣nished with infamy, for your treachery; and since you cannot do them harm, your best way will be to imitate them for your own good.
So we shall be laughed at, and stared on as Monkeys, and scorn∣ed; forasmuch as we offer at that which is beyond our abilities, and what∣soever is forced, and constrained, appears ridiculous.
Come let us leave speaking of them, and thinking of them, if we can.
Surely Wife you do not love me, you are not any way kind to me.
True Love Husband, is not so fond as ser∣viceable.
But true Love will express it self sometimes: for if you did truly Love me, you would hang about my Neck, as if you meant to dwell there.
If I thought my kindness might not Surfeit your af∣fection, I would hang about your Neck, as the Earth to the Center, and as you move should bear me still about you; but I am afraid if over fond, you should be weary of me, and account me a trouble, and I had rather starve all my delights, than make you loath my Company.
This is but an excuse Wife.
Why are you Jealous, that you think my words speak not my thoughts? have I behaved my self so indiscreetly, or have my actions been so light, as you believe I shall be wanton?
No, I do not fear your Virtue.
Do you fear my Indiscretion?
I hope you will give me no cause to fear, although Husbands are oftner dishonoured by their Wives Indiscretions, than their Inconstant affections.
Pray be confident, that I shall have a greater care of your Honour, than of my own Life.
The Lady Natures three Daughters, namely Wit, Beauty, and Love, are the sweetest, and most Virtuous Ladies in the World.
I have heard so much of their fame, as I have a great desire to see them.
You may see the Lady Wit, for she doth discourse often in public; but for the other two Sisters, they are somewhat more retired.
How shall we know the time, that the Lady Wit discour∣ses in public?
I am now going to see if I can get a place, where I may
I will go with you, if you will give me leave.
With all my Heart.
My Noble Lord, I am a Gentleman, one that is ruined by Fortunes spite, and not by my own Carelessness, Vanity, Luxury, or Prodigality; for my Poverty is honest: but though my Poverty hath an ho∣nest face, yet it is ashamed to appear in the open sight of public knowledge, which makes me whisper my wants to your Lordships private Ear.
Sir, if your necessities can conceal themselves, they shall never be divulged by me; and what I can honestly give you out of my Estate, and not very imprudently from my self, I shall freely, and secretly, distribute to you, and such as are in your condition.
Your Lordships Servant.
The mind is the best Tutor, and ought to instruct the Senses how to choose; for the Senses are but as the working La∣borers, to bring Lifes materials in; but O my Senses have betrayed my mind, in bringing through my Ears, and Eyes, Beauty, and Wit, which like as creeping Serpents, got passage to my heart, and winding round about with flattering embraces, yet sting the peace, and quiet of my mind, raising therein blisters of discontent, causing an anguish of restless thoughts, which work, and beat like pulsive pa•n.
But O had I been born both Deaf and Blind,
Then might I scope this Hell tormenting mind;
His Wit like various Music pierced my Ear,
Some being solemn, and some pleasant were
And when he spake, his person did appear
Like to the Sun, when no dark Clouds were near;
Fame of his valour, like a trumpet sound,
Through Ears from Heart, unto the Eyes rebound;
And then his person, like Mars did appear,
Yet so, as when fair Venus Queen was near.
O Love forbear, use not this cruelty,
Either bind him, or give me liberty.
What are you all alone sweet Mistress?
No Sir, I have the Company of thoughts.
Those are Melancholy Companions.
Indeed mine are so at this time; yet thoughts with thoughts may discourse wittily, and converse pleasantly together, without articulate words.
Certainly your thoughts must needs be pleasant, your words are so witty.
No truly, for my thoughts lie in my brain like a Chaos in a con∣fused heap, and my brain being young, hath not enough natural heat to dis∣gest them into a Methodical order; neither hath Time cooked them ready for the Mind to dish out, or the Tongue to carry to the Ears of the hearers.
The oftner I hear, and see you, the more I wonder at you.
Why, I hope Sir I am no Monster?
No, for you seem to me something divine.
Then you should rather admire me: for Admiration proceeds from things excellent, Wonder from things strange and unusual.
So you are strange, and unusual: for things divine are not com∣mon; and certainly you are a thing illuminated beyond Natures Art, and are the only delight of Mankind.
Men take no worldly delight in Celestial Creatures, but with Earthly; wherefore the most refined and illuminated, is oftenest rejected.
No Lady, they are not rejected, but as Angels, they will not reside with us.
Sir, for fear I should lose the Angelical opinion you have of me, I will depart soon as Angels do.
Come, will you go to hear the Lady Wit discourse?
Not I.
Will you go?
I will not go to hear a prating preaching woman.
O that all the Masculine Sex would say as much.
Let us go to learn Wit.
I had rather be a Dunce all my Life.
So had I, if I must have none but a Woman instructor.
Indeed women should learn, not teach.
It's a sign Men want Wit, when they go to hear a Woe∣man preach.
But let us go, if it be but to censure; for an hundred to one, but she will say something which may be contradicted.
Then let us agree to be her contradictors: for whatsoever she saith we will confute.
Nay by your favour, that you cannot do; for though you may contradict any argument, yet not confute it: for though Envy and Spite have bred Sophistry, yet Envy and Spite cannot confute the Truth.
Well, let us go howsoever, if it be but to see, and be seen of those men as will be there to hear her.
Content.
Great Fortune, I at this time do implore,
That thou wilt open every hearing door,
Which are the Ears: let not my Wit be lost,
For want of bearing, nor my words be crossed,
Nor yet destructed by a bustling noise,
Or gazing, or observing some light toys:
But let their Ears be sixth, as if their sight
Did view my words, till on their Ears they light.
Noble and Right Honourable,
I shall take my discourse at this time out of Ignorance, which discourse, I shall divide into Five Parts, the Gods, Fates, Nature, the World, and Man; for although Ignorance be obscure, and hard to be discovered, yet it is printed in a general Language, being spread and communicated over all the World. I begin with the First, and prime Creature, Ignorant Man. Man takes himself to be the most knowing Creature, for which he hath placed himself next to the Gods; yet Man is ignorant: for what Man is, or ever was created, that knows what the Gods are, or how many there are? Or what power they have, or where they reside? What Man did ever know the Mansions of Glory, the Bowers of bliss, or the Fields of plea∣sure? What Man ever knew whether the Gods were Eternal, or bred out of infinite, or rule, or govern, infinite Eternally?
Secondly the Fates. What Man is, or ever was, that knows the Fates? As whether they are Gods or Creatures, or whether the Fates are limited, or decree as they please? Or what Man is, or ever was, that knows the decrees of Fate, the links of Destiny, or the chance of Fortune, or the lots of Chance.
Thirdly. What Man is, or ever was, that knows what Nature is, or from whence her power proceeds? As whether from the Gods, or Eterni∣tie, or infinite, or from the Fates? Or whether the Gods, or Fates, proceed from her? Or what at first set her to work? Or whether her work is pre∣scribed, or limited? Or of what she works on? Or what instruments she works with? Or to what end she works for? Or whether she shall de∣sist from working, or shall work Eternally? Or whether she worked from all Eternity? Or whether her work had a beginning, or shall have an end∣ing? What Man knows the beginning of Motion, or the Fountain of Know∣ledge, or the Spring of Life, or Gulf of Death? Or what Life is? Or what Death is? Or whether Life, Motion, and Death, had a beginning, or shall have an ending?
Fourthly the World. What Man is, or ever was, that knows how the World was made? Or for what it is made? Or by whom it was made? Or whether it had beginning, or shall have end?
The Fifth and last is Man. What Man is, or ever was, that knows how he was formed, or of what composition, or what is that he calls a Rational Soul? Whether it is embodied, or not embodied? Whether it is Divine, or Mortal? Whether it proceeds from the Gods, or was created by Na∣ture? Whether it shall live for ever, or shall have a period? Whether it shall live in Knowledge, or lie in Ignorance? Whether it be capable of pain, or pleasure? Whether it shall have a residing place, or no certain place assigned? Or if it have none, where it shall wander? Or if it have, where that residing place is.
As for the Body, who knows the perfect Sense of each Sense, or what mistake, or illusions, each Sense is apt to make, or give, or take? What Man knows how the Body dissolves, or to what it shall dissolve? What Man knows whether there be Sense in Death, or not? What Man knows the motion of the thoughts, or whether the thoughts belong only to the Soul, or only to the Body, or partly to both, or of neither? What Man is there that knows strength of passion? As what Faith may beget? Or what Doubts may dissolve? Or what Hopes may unite? Or what Fears may dis∣order? Or what Love can suffer? Or what Hate can act?
What Man is there that knows the Circumpherence of Admiration, the ri∣gore of Adoration, the hight of Ambition, or the bottom of Covetousness? Or what Man knows the end of Sorrow, or beginning of Joy? And as for the Appetites, what Man knows the length and breadth of desire? As for the Senses, what Man is there, that knows the true Sense of Pleasure, or the ut∣termost bounds of Pain? Who can number the varieties of Taste, Sent, Touch, Sound, and Sight? What Man knows the perfect effects of each Sense? Or what Man is there that knows any thing, truly as it is? Yet cer∣tainly there cannot be an Athest; for though men may be so irreligious, as to be of no Religion; yet their can be none so wilful, and utterly void of all Sense, and Reason, as not to believe there is a God; for though we have not the true light of knowledge, yet we have as it were a perpetual twilight; Man lives as at the poles of knowledge; for though we cannot say it is truly day, yet it is not night. Man may perceive an Infinite power, by the perfect distinctions of all particular varieties, by the orderly production of several Creatures, and by the fit, and proper shapes of every several kind of Creature; by their orderly Births, by the times and Seasons, to produce, flourish, and decay; by the distinct degrees, qualities, properties, places and
motions of all things, and to, and in every thing, by the exact form of this World; by the prudent separations, and situations of the Heavens and Earth; by the Circumference lines, and poising Centers; by their bounds and limits; by their orderly, and timely motions; by their assigned tracts, constant Journeys, convenient distances; by their intermixing, and well tempering of the Elements; by the profitable Commerce, betwixt the Hey∣vans and the Earth; by the different kinds, several sorts, various Natures, numerous numbers of Creatures; by their passions, humours, appetites; by their Sympathies, and Antipathies; by their wars and parties; by the Harmony that is made out of discord, shows that there is only one absolute power, and wise disposer, that cannot be opposed, having no Copartners, pro∣duces all things, being not produced by any thing, wherefore must be Eter∣nil, and consequently infinite; this absolute, wise, and Eternal power Man calls God; but this absolute power, being infinite, he must of necessity be incomprehensible, and being incomprehensible, must of necessity be un∣known, yet glimses of his power is, or may be seen; yet not so, but that Man is forced to set up Candels of Faith, to light them, or direct them to that they cannot perfectly know, and for want of the clear light of know∣ledge, Man calls all Creations of this mighty power Nature; his wise de∣crees, Man calls Fates; his pointed will, Man calls Destiny; his several Changes, Man calls Fortune; his Intermixing Man calls Life; his sepera∣ting, Man calls Death; the Sympathetical, and Antipathetical motions of the Senses, and their Objects, Humours, and their Subjects, Man calls Plea∣sure, and Pain; the interchanging motions in Man, Men call Sense, and Knowledge; the separating motions, Man calls Ignorance, Stupidity, and Insensibility; my application is, that this absolute Power, wise Disposer, and decreeing Creator, hath created himself Worship, in making Creatures to worship him; and it is probable, Truth decreed Judgment, Punishment, and Bliss, to such of his Creatures as shall omit, or submit thereunto: my exhoration to you is, to bough humbly, to pray constantly, to implore ser∣vently, to love truly, to live awfully to the worship of this incomprehensible power; that you may enjoy bliss and avoid torment.
I wonder who brought up that careless fashion, to go with∣out their Swords; and I wonder more, how gallant valiant men, came to follow that fashion; for a Sword is a valiant mans trusty friend, to whose protection, he delivers his Honour, his Safety, and his Peace; for a Sword is a Mans Guardian, to maintain his Right, to revenge his Wrongs, or Disgraces, and his Mistress, for whole service he wears his Life, and studies the worth and use thereof, and takes delight in the Honourable, and allowable practices therein.
Faith my Lord I believe it was some Lover that brought up that fashion, who was loath to affright his Mistress, with so dangerous a weapon.
Some Carpet Knight upon my life my Lord.
It was no true Lover; for certainly he would be sure to pro∣vide a safeguard, lest his Mistress might be taken from him, or lest he should be affronted in her sight, which a Man of Honour, and a true Lover, will ra∣there die than part or suffer; and as for my part, I commend the Man that would neither eat, drink, nor sleep, without his Sword were by him, and made it his Bedfellow, and Board Companion; as a friend that held to his side, and would sight in his quarrel.
My Lord, if a man should do so in these times, his Neighbours would say it was out of fear, not courage.
O no, for a Coward is afraid to use a Sword, and a Valiant man is afraid to be without the use, otherwise a strong sturdy Clown, might cuff him down, and kick him like a Football on the ground, which a Sword, and skill to use it, will prevent; for a Clown hath not skill to defend, or assault a Sword, having no practice therewith, nor ought they to have; for the use of this kind of Arms makes a Clown a Gentleman, and the want of skill makes a Gentleman a Clown; for a Right bred Gentleman, is to know the use of the Sword, and it is more manly to assault, than to defend; also to know how to manage Horses, whereby we know how to assault our Enemy as well as to defend our selves; for it is not playing with a Fiddle, and dancing a Measure, makes a Gentleman; for then Princes should dub Knighthood with a Fiddle, and give the stick, and a pair of Pumps, instead of a Sword, and a pair of Spurs.
My Lord, we are so far from wearing our Swords our selves now a days, as we give them our Footmen to carry, as if it were a disgrace to carry a Sword our selves.
Tic true, and we are well beaten for our follies, for disarm∣ing our selves, and arming our Slaves; for now a Groom is made a Gentle∣mans equal, nay his Superior sometimes; for if a Groom kills a Gentle∣man, the Gentleman dyes in disgrace, and the Groom lives with Honour, and gets the Fame of a gallant Person; for that is the phrase to all those that have fought, although they were forced thereto as Slaves, not distinguishing true valour, which is voluntary, temperate and just.
Why then there should be a Decree, of Law, that none should wear Swords but Gentlemen, nor Arms allowed, but to those of approved merit.
You say right, unless in time of Foreign Wars, and then there should be a difference in their Arms; for if there be no difference of Arms, no difference of persons, and if there be no difference of persons, there will be no Supremacy of Power, if no Supremacy, no Royal Govern∣meant; for as the Sword maintains the Prerogative of the Crown, so it doth the Honour of a Gentleman; and as the Sword keeps up the dignity of the Crown, so a Sword keeps up the Heraldry of a Gentleman; and no man ought to be accounted a Gentleman, that knows not how to use his Sword, and manage his Horse; for the one defends himself, and kills his Enemies; the other, doth front and charge his Enemy, and pursues him if need require.
Lord Wife you are very brave to day.
I strive to be so every day.
For whose sake.
For yours.
For mine? why sure that is not so, for certainly you would not take that pains, and bestow so much cost, for one you do enjoy already, for a Husband that is tied to you for life, and cannot quit on Ho∣nourable terms; wherefore it is for one is loose and free, which you do strive by setting forth your self with garments rich, for to attract, and draw to your desires.
The Circumference of my desires is only your delight.
Why, my delight is in your Virtue, youth, and Beau∣tie, not in your Clothes.
But Virtue is best acceptable, when Beauty doth present it; and Beauty finds most favour, when well attired; but were I sure you would like me better in mean Garments, and careless dresses, I then should Cloth my self in Freeze, &amp; like a Hermit my loose course Garments tie with single cord about my waste; but I will go and pull these Clothes off, since they are thought a crime, and I thought false for wearing them.
No, I like them very well, if I were sure they were worn only for love to me.
I never gave you cause to think I wear them for the love of any other.
Mademoiselle La Belle is cried up to be the only Beauty in the Kingdom.
Lord that is nothing, for sometimes opinion will carry a black Blowse up to Fems high Tower.
Yes faith, and most commonly they are cast down in disgrace.
Why should she be cried up so? for she is neither well fea∣tured, nor well shaped, nor well fashioned, nor well dressed, nor well bred, nor good natured; for she is of a brown Complexion, a heavy Eye, a sad Countenance, a lazy Garb; she dresses Phantastically, speaks Childishly,
looks shamefastly; she is proud, reserved, coy, disdainful, and self-conceited.
Let me tell you, it is reported that she hath most lovely features, a clear Complexion, a modest Countenance, a bashful Eye, a pleasing Speech, a winning behaviour, a Majestic presence; besides it is reported that her disposition is civil, courteous, and obliging, her Nature sweet and gentle, her Education virtuous, her life temperate and Chaste, her actions noble and wise, her discourse witty and delightful.
Hey day, hey day, good Mistress Tell-truth run not so fast in the ways of vain Reports, lest your judgment fail into a Quagmire.
Monsieur Fantasy, tic said you are one of Mademoiselle La Belles admirers.
All the World would admire her, if they saw her, she is so Heavenly a Creature.
If she be so Heavenly a Creature, she would be known to the whole World by the splendour of her Beams.
Heaven is not made known to all; neither can the glories be suddenly comprehended, by weak Mortals.
Good Lord, if she hath such an infinite Beauty, that it cannot be comprehended, it is obscure.
But those that comprehend least will be astonished, and struck with deep amaze.
I believe you are struck with Love, which makes you Blind, or Mad, that makes you think you see your own imaginations: wherefore fare you well, until you are sober.
I am struck indeed, for I am wonded deeper than Swords can pierce, or Bullets shoot at.
Your Lordship rid to day beyond Perseus on his Pegasus.
No Monsieur, he went (if Poets speak truth) in higher Capreols than ever I shall make my Horse go.
He might go higher my Lord, but never keep so just a time, and place, as to pitch from whence he rise, his feet in the same Circle, his legs in the same lines, and your Lordship in the same Center.
The truth is, my Horses went well to day; they were like Musical Instruments, fitly strung, and justly tuned.
And your Lordship, like a skilful Musician, played rarely thereon.
Come Gentlemen, let us to Dinner, for I have uncivilly tyred your Stomachs with a long fast.
Sir, you may very well start to see me here, I do not use modesty, pardon me to be so bold to visit Men; it is the first visit I ever made your Sex, and hope it will be the last, but I am come, since nei∣there Letter, nor Messenger, could have access to be resolved by your own Confession, whether you have forsaken me or not.
No, I have not forsaken you.
But your affection prefers another before me.
If I should say I did not, I should belly Truth, which baseness I abhor.
I am glad for your own sake you keep so much Honour, though sorry, that you are no constanter, and more sorry for the Oaths you took, and Vows you made to me, since they became the witnesses of your perjury. I was not suddenly, nor easily brought to draw a Supreme Love to one; for before such time my Love was placed on you, my affections run equally in purling Brooks of Pity, and Compassion, and clear fresh Rivulets of Cha∣rity and Humanity, from the pure Springs of good Nature and Religion; and hard it will be for me to turn this River to each stream again, if not, yet I shall be a rest, twill overflow my heart and drown me.
Oh I must curse my Fortune, and my Fate; la∣meant my own condition to love without return, and only pity what I loved most.
Great Mercury to thee I now address,
Employ thy favour, help me in distress;
Thou God of Eloquence, so guide my tongue,
Let all my words on even sense be slrung,
And let my Speech be tuned to every Ear,
That every Ear each several word may hear:
That every passion may in measure move,
And let the figure of the Dance be Love.
Noble and Right Honourable,
I will discourse at this time of Love, not of the superfluous Branches, or withered leaves, or rotten fruits, but of the Root of Love, which is Self-love; It is the Root and Original Love in Nature; it is the Foundation of Nature, it is the Fountain from whence issues all the several Springs; Self-love was the cause of the Worlds Creation; for the Gods out of love to them∣selves, caused Creatures to be Created, to worship them: thus all Cry∣tures being created out of self-love, and their chief being proceeding out of self-love, is the cause that every particular Creature loves themselves in the first place, and what Love is placed on any other, or to any other, from any particular, is derived from self-love; for we love the Gods but out of self-love, as believing the Gods love us; we adore the Gods but out of self-love, because we think we proceed from them, or were produced by their commands; we pray to the Gods but out of self-love, because we hope the Gods will help us in distress; we bless the Gods but out of self-love, be∣cause we do verily believe the Gods will exalt, and Crown us with everlast∣ing glory; and to show that we Love the Gods, not as they are Gods, but for our own sakes, as believing they will or can do us good, is, that we are apt to murmur at the Gods, when we have not our own desires; we are apt to accuse the Gods, when any wordly thing crosses us; we are apt to curse the Gods at ill Accidents, Misfortunes, or Natural losses; we are apt to forget the Gods in the midst of pleasure; we are apt to think our selves Gods in the pride of prosperity; we strive to make our selves Gods in the hight of worldly power; and we do not only strive to make our selves equal with the Gods, but to raise our selves above the Gods, taking, or command∣ing to our selves more worship than we give unto the Gods; nay, those that are accounted the most holy and devout Servants of the Gods, belie the Gods, taking the name of the Gods to cover their own follies; as for exam∣ple, whenever any eminent person hath had ill success, either in, or after their Foolish, Ambitious, and Vain-glorious actions, they charge the Gods Decrees and pleasure, as it was the Gods will it should be so; like as she that Vaingloriously had her two and only Sons to draw her Chariot, like two Horses, or Dogs, or Slaves, and being both found Dead the next day, she had prayed to the Gods to reward them with that which was best for them, and being both dead, she said the Gods accounted Death as the best reward, when they no doubt dyed with over heating themselves, striving beyond
their natural power and strength; yet these two Sons that drew the vain Mo∣there in a Chariot, drew and died out of self-love; either like as vain Sons like their vain Mother, vaingloriously to get a fame, or believing the Gods would reward them for their Act, either with extraordinary prosperity, pow∣er, or blessedness in the Life to come; and many the like examples may be go∣ven; for how ordinary is it in these our times, and in former times, for the politics to persuade the people, with promises from the Gods, or to tell them it is the Gods commands they should do such and such acts, even such acts as are unnatural, wicked, and most horrid? thus Men belly the Gods to abuse their fellow Creatures. But most Noble and Right Honourable, my explanation of this discourse is, that since Self-love is the Fountain of and in Nature from whence issue out several Springs to every several Creature, wherein Mankind being her chiefest and Supreme work, is filled with the fullest Springs from that Fountain, which is the cause that Mankind is more industrious, cruel, and unsatiable, to and for his self ends, than any other Creature, he spares nothing that he hath power to destroy, if he fears any hurt, or hopes for any gain, or finds any pleasure, or can make any sport, or to employ his idle time; he melts metals, distills and dissolves plants, dis∣sects animals, substracts and extracts Elements, he digs up the bowels of the Earth, cuts through the Ocean of the Sea, gathers the winds into Sails, fresh waters into Mills, and imprisons the thinner Ayre; he Hunts, he Fowls, he Fishes for sport, with Guns, Nets, and Hooks; he cruelly causes one Creature to destroy another, the whilst he looks on with delight; he kills not only for to live, but lives for to kill, and takes pleasure in torturing the life of other Creatures, in prolonging their pains, and lengthening their Deaths; and when Man makes friendship of Love, it is for his own sake, ei∣there in humouring his passion, or feeding his humour, or to strengthen his party, or for Trust, or Counsel, or Company, or the like causes; if he dies for his friend, it is either for fame, or that he cannot live himself happy with∣out his friend, his passion, and grief, making him restless; if Man loves his Children, Wife, or Parents, tic for his own sake; he loves his Parents, for the honour he receives by them, or for the life he received of them; if he loves his Wife, or the Wife the Husband, it is for their own sakes, as their own pleasure, as either for their Beauties, Wits, Humours, or other Graces, or for their Company, or Friendships, or because they think they love them; if they love their Children, it is for their own sakes, as to keep alive their memory, and to have their duty, and obedience, to bow and do homage to them; If Masters love their Servants, it is for their own sakes, because they are trusty, faithful and industrious in their affairs, employ∣mints, or for their own profit, or ease; and if Servants love their Masters, it is for their own sakes, as either for their power to protect them, or for the regard they have to them, or for the gain they get from them, or for their lives that are nourished, and maintained by them; if Amorous Lovers love, it is for their own sakes, as to please the Appetite, and to satisfy their desires; if Subjects love their Sovereigns, it is for their own sakes, as that they may have Law and Justice, Peace and Unity; If Sovereigns love their Subjects, it is for their own sakes, because they bear up his Throne with their Wealth and Industry, and fight to maintain, or get him power. My Apply∣cation, most Noble and Right Honourable, is, that since we do all, and in e∣very act for our own sakes, we should endeavour, and study, for that which is best for our selves, and the ground of our endeavour is to learn, and know
our selves, every particular person must learn and know himself, not by comparative, as observing others, for every man is not alike; but by self study, reading our own Natures and Dispositions, marking our own Passions, morse, and Appetites, with the Pen of Thought, and Ink of Examination; and let the Truth be the Tutor to instruct you in the School of Reason, in which you may Commence Master of Art, and go out Doctor of Judgment, to practise Temperance; for Temperance keeps in its full strength, prolongs Beauty, quickens Wit, ripens Youth, refreshes Age, restores Decays, keeps Health, maintains Life, and hinders Times ruins; but Temperance is not only a Doctor of Physic; a Physician to the Body, but a Doctor of Divinity, a Divine for the Soul; It preaches and teaches good Life, it instructs with the Doctrine of Tranquillity, and guides to the Heaven of Happiness; also Temperance is the Doctor of Music, it tunes the Senses, composes the Thoughts, it notes the Passions, it measures the Appetites, and plays a Har∣monious Mind. Thus Most Noble and Right Honourable, I have proved that Self-love is the Fountain of Nature, and the Original Springs of her Creatures, and that Temperance is the strongest Foundation of Self-love, although few build thereupon, but upon Intemperance, which is a hugh Bulk of Excess, the substance of Riot, worm eaten with Surfers, rotten with Pain, and sinks down to death with Sickness and Grief, not being able to bear and uphold Life; wherefore build your Lives upon Temperance, which is a strong and sure Foundation, which will never fail; but will uphold your Lives as long as Time and Nature permits them, and your Souls will dwell peaceably, and happily therein.
I will confess to him my Love, since my designs are Noble; but O for a woman to woo a man is against Nature, and seems too bold, nay impudent, only by a contrary custom; but why should not a woman confess she loves before she is wooed, when after a seeming coyness gives consent, as being won more by a Treaty than by Love, when her obscure thoughts know well her heart was his at first, bound as his prisoner, and only counterfeits a freedom; besides, it were unjust although an ancient cu∣stome, if dissembling should be preferred before a Modern Truth, for length of Time and often practices makes not Falsehood Truth, nor Wrong Right, nor Evil Good; then I will break down Customs Walls, and honest Truth shall lead me on.
Love plead my Suit, and if I be denied,
My heart will break, and Death my Face will hide.
Wife, whither do you go? when I come near you, you always turn to go from me.
I saw you not; for I had rather be fixed as a Sty∣tu, than move to your dislike.
Why do you blush? surely you are guilty of some crime.
It is said blushing comes unsent for, and departs without leave; and that it oftner visits Innocence than guilt.
What do you weep?
How can I otherwise choose, when my Innocent Life, and True Love is suspected, and all my pure affections are cast away like dross, and the best of all my actions condemned as Traitors, and my unspotted Chastity blemished with soul Jealousy, and defamed with slander∣ing words?
Prethy Wife do not weep, for every tear wounds me to Death, and know it is my extreme Love, which creates my fears; but you might have had a Husband with more faults.
It is true, but not so many noble qualities as you have, which makes me weep, doubting you Love me not, you are so Jealous.
By Heaven I love thee beyond my Soul, wherefore forbear to weep if thou can stop thy tears.
Tears may be stopped, unless they flow from an unrecoverable loss, which Heaven forbid mine should: yet sorrow oft doth stop the Spring from whence tears rise, or else the Eyes do weep them∣selves quite blind.
Pray dry yours.
O Man! O Man! How various and Inconstant are you all, how cruel to betray our faint and unexperienced Sex, bribing our Judgments with flattering words, obscure our reasons with Clouds of Sighs, drawing us into belief with protestations, bind us with promises and vows, forcing us to yield up our affections; then murder us with scorn, and bury us in forgetfulness? but O how happy was I, before I was betrayed by Love? my heart was free, my thoughts were pleasant, and my
humour gay; but now my mind is a Garrison of cares, my thoughts like runaways are wanderers.
Grief on my heart his heavy taxes lays;
Which through my Eyes, my heart those taxes pays.
Love and Discretion sight duels in my mind, one makes me Mute, the other doth persuade me to prefer my Suit; but why should I be nice to speak, or be ashamed to woo with words, when all our Sex doth woo with several dresses and smiles? each civil cour∣tesy doth plead Loves Suit; then I will on, Love give me Courage, and Mer∣cury guide my tongue.
Noble Sir, impute it rather as a folly to my Sex and Youth, and not any impudence of Nature, if that my Innocence discovers my passion and affection, not having Craft, or subtlety to conceal them; but I must plain∣lie tell you, no sooner did I see you, and hear you speak, but loved: but yet mistake me not, I dote not on your person, but your mind; for sure your Noble Soul shot fire through my Eyes into my Heart, there flames with pure affection, but for this confession, perchance you will set me as a mark of scorn, for all to shoot their scofs at, and in derision pointing, will laugh and say, there is the Maid that wooed a Man.
Is this to me Lady?
It cannot be to any other, Nature could make but one, and that was you.
If this be real you do profess, the Gods, should they have sent an Angel down to offer me their Heavenly Mansion, it had not been so great a gift as your affection.
Do you not hate me then?
Nothing I Love so well.
And will you Love me ever?
Yes ever; for when my Body is dissolved, Love shall live in my dust in spite of Death.
And will you love none but me?
An entire and undivided affection, can be placed but upon one, and that is you.
May your constancy be as firm, as my Love pure.
Dear Mistress stay, that I may gaze upon you,
Then bow my knee, as to the rising Sun;
Heave up my hands, as when to Heaven I pray,
But being amazed, know not one word I say:
Yet superstitiously, I shall adore,
As my chief Goddess, shall thy love implore;
And being worshipped, you are deified,
Your Godhood in your Beauty doth recide.
Thou absolute Beauty, for thy dear sake,
Of Lovers hearts, a foot-stool shall be made;
A Cushion soft, with Hopes filled full, then laid,
For thee to stand, and triumph on, fair Maid;
And Lovers Souls shall from their bodies fly,
For thee a Couch, when weary on to lie.
Thy Lovers tears for to invite thy rest,
In murmuring streams, fall on thy marble breast;
And gentle sighs, like whispering winds shall blow,
And fan thy Cheeks, that Poets fire may glow:
Loves Melancholy thoughts, like Clouds of night,
Like as thy Curtains, drawn before thy sight;
For fear the Sun should trouble out of spite,
Thy Eyes repose, being the greater light.
Sweet Beauty, thou in a glorious Throne shall set,
The spangled Heaven, seems but thy Counterfeit;
Thy Chariot shall be stuck with Eyes all gazing,
And oyld with Eloquent tongues, that runs with praising:
Drawn by large strong well shaped Commendations,
Guided by Fame, about two several Nations.
Admiration, Vainglory, Pride, and Ambition,
Why do you woo Beauty, that is Deaf and Dumb,
That hears no praise, nor adoration;
It sees no hands heaved up, nor tears that fall,
It hath no tongue to answer Love withal;
It hath no Life, no Soul where passion lies,
It neither gives, nor takes instructions wise:
It is no solid Body you admire,
No substance, but a shadow you desire.

Great Fame my Prayers I direct to thee,
That thou wilt keep me in thy memory;
And place my Name in the large brazen Tower,
That neither Spite, nor Time may it devour;
And write it plain, that every age may see,
My Names inscribed to live eternally:
Let not Malice obstruct my Wit with spite,
But let it shine in its own clear light.
Noble and Right Honourable,
I divide my discourse into three parts, as namely Vanity, Vice, and Wickedness; Vanity lives in the Customs and Manners of men, and Wick∣oddness in the Souls of men, Vices in the Senses of men, as vain habits, evil appetites, and wicked passions; as for Vanity and Vice, they are common∣ditties that are sold out of the Shops of Idleness; Vice is sold by wholesale, but Vanities are sold by retail; the Buyers of these Commodities are Youth, the Merchants, are evil Customs, and ill examples; the Masculine youth buys more Vice than Vanity, and the Effeminate youth buys more Va∣nity than Vice; but they all buy, as salt as they can be sold; they will spare for not cost, and will give any prices, although it be their Healths, Lives, Fortunes, or Reputations; as for Wickedness, it is inlayed into the soul like as Mosaic work, and so close it is wrought therein, as it makes it ap∣pear to be the soul it self; but evil Education and Custom, are the Artifi∣cers of this work, and not natural Creation, or divine infusion, or inspire∣tion, from whence the Soul proceeds, or is produced, for neither the Gods, nor Nature, is the Author of Wickedness; but Vanity, Vice, and Wick∣oddness, are soon caught, and like the Plague, they infect all they come near, and Vanity, Vice, and Wickedness is soon learned, when Virtue, Goodness, and Piety, are hard Lessons; for though Divines and natural Philosophers, Preaches, and so teaches them, yet they are seldom understood; for if they were, the benefit would be known, and men would pious and virtuous be, for profits sake; for Commonwealths that are composed, and governed by Virtue, Religion, and good Life, they are so strongly united by honest love, as they become inpregnable against Foreign Foes, or home factions, or
temptations, so live in peace and plenty, which breeds both pleasure and delight; for life doth never truly enjoy it self, but in rest, ease, and peace; but to conclude most Noble and Right Honourable, the Soul, Se•se, and Education, should be plain with Truth, smooth with Virtue, and bright with Picty, or Zeal; that the Body may live Easily, the life Peaceably, and that the Soul may be blessed with Everlasting Glory.
The Ladies of this Age, are as inconstant as a fevourish pulse, and their affections have more sainting sits, than those are troubled with Epilepses.
Faith they will hang about ones neck one hour, and spit in his Face the next.
That is because they would have variety, for they respect Strangers more than friends; for they will entertain Strangers with the ci∣vilest Behaviours, fairest Faces, and costliest Garments they have, and make them welcome with their best Cheer, when as their best Friends, lovingest Servants, and oldest Acquaintance, they will neglect, despise, scorn, com∣mand, and rail against, and quarrel with.
O Gentlemen, brave Cavaliers as you all are, you must no∣ver complain, discommend, not condemn the Actions of the Effeminate Sex; for that we are apt to call their Cruelty, is their Justice, our Sex meriting not their favours; and whenever we receive the least favours from that Sex, we ought to give thanks, as proceeding from a compassionate Good∣nos, gentle Nature, sweet Dispositions, and generous Souls, and not as a due, or a debt for our service: for we are bound by Nature, not only to be their Servants, but their Slaves, to be lashed with their frowns, if we be not diligent to their commands, present at their calls, industrious in their ser∣vice, and our neglects ought to be severely punished; for we wear our lives only for their sakes, as to defend their Honours, to protect their Persons, to obey their Commands, and to please and delight their humours; also the Estates we manage is theirs, not ours, we are but their Stuarts, to Husband and increase their Stores, to receive their Revenues, and lay out their Expen∣ces, for we have nothing we call our own, since we our selves are theirs; wherefore it is enough for us to admire their Beauties, to applaud their Wit, to worship their Virtues, and give thanks for their Favours.
Wife, why art thou all undressed to day?
The truth is, I am become negligent in dressing, since you only esteem my Virtue, not my Habit,
I would have you change into as many several dres∣ses, as Protheus shapes; for it is not the dress can make me Jealous now, for I am confident no Vanity can corrupt thy Virtue, but that thy Virtue can con∣vert Vanity to a pious use or end.
Well Husband, I shall study to form my self, and fashion my dress, both to your fancy and desire.
Do so Wife.
Ha, is my Husband so confident of me, it is an ill sign from extreme Jealousy, to an extreme Confidence, the next will be a Carelessness, and then a Neglect, and there is nothing my Nature doth more abhor than neglect, for Jealousy proceeds from Love, but Neglect proceeds from a despising, if not a hating; besides, he desires variety of dresses, which shows my Beauty is voted, or he is weary in viewing of one object often; but I sit•d his humour is wandering, and seeks for change, if he should prove false, O how unhappy should I be, for I am naturally honest, also my birth and education hath been honest; besides my affections are so fixed as not to be removed: thus I am tied, and cannot take liberty which other women do, for no divert the sorrows of my heart, or to revenge my wrongs; but I shall mourn, and weep my self to Water, and sigh my self to Ayre.
The bond of our Love is written in large profession, but not sealed with the contracting kiss yet.
So Sister, are not you ashamed?
No truly; for my love is so honest, and the subject of my love so worthy, as I am so far from being ashamed to own it, as I glory in my affection.
I only wonder that with so small acquaintance, such a familiar friendship should be made.
You have no cause to wonder, for Innocence is easi∣lie known, tic craft and subtlety that is obscure, and treacherous falsehood with leering Eyes, doth at a distance stand, when honestly and truth straight joins in friendships bonds.
My Sweet, Innocent, Virtuous, Wise, Mistress.
I pity poor Mademoiselle Bon.
Why so?
Because she is forsaken.
I cannot pity a Fool.
Why, she is no Fool.
Yes Faith but she is, to be constant to an inconstant man.
The truth is, I think that woman wisest that forsakes before she is forsaken.
But how and if she meets with a constant man?
That she cannot do, for there is no man constant; for they are all false, and more changing than women are.
If any should prove inconstant to me, I would Pistol him.
Yes with the Gunpowder breath, the Bullets of words, and the Fire of anger, which will do them no hurt.
The best revenge I know against an Inconstant Man is, to despise him.
He will not care for your despisements, but Patience, Patience is the best remedy, for then a woman will be content, although she hath not her desires.
Can any Creature be content without the fruition of desire?
Those that cannot, must be unhappy all their Life.
Then all Mankind is unhappy, for I dare I swear, there is not any that can be content without the fruition of desire; for desire is so restless, as it gives no time for content.
The truth is, content only lives in words, but never lives in deeds; for I never heard, or saw any one truly content in my life.
The truth is, Content is like the Shadow of a Substance, or the Thought of an Act, and therefore let us leave it, as we would idle, or vain Thoughts, or voting, or vanishing Shadows.
Sir, it is reported you are a Servant to my Mistress.
I am a Servant to the whole Effeminate Sex, and to her, if she be a woman.
Yes, she is a woman, and the fairest of her kind.
Why then I am her Slave.
I desire you will enslave your self to some other, and not to her.
You must pardon me if she be the fairest, for I am bound to the absolutest Beauty.
Draw.
Nay, I am not so rash; for by your favour I will view her with mine own Eyes, and take the opinion of my own Judgment, and not venture my life on your bare word.
I say draw.
I shall, but know, I only fight in mine own defence, not for her Beauty, unless I saw her, and approved her such as you affirm her to be: for though I am Servant to all, yet tic impossible all should be an abso∣lute Beauty.
Know, I account all those my Enemies that question it; be∣sides you give me the lye in doubting the truth.
I perceive it is your violent passion that persuades you, or ra∣there forces you to fight, and not your Reason; and if your passion were to be counselled, I would counsel you to stay, until we choose our Seconds, to witness how we fought, not in a furious rage, but when our spirits are fresh and cool, our Minds as equal tempered as our Blades, and that our valours are not ashamed to own the quarrel; so shall we sight on just and honest grounds, and honour will be the purchase we shall gain.
He hear no more but fight.
Nature, I ask thy pardon, I must engage thee to a furious rage, of sudden fit, or frantic humour, which are for thee to scorn, and flight, and not to fight.
Monsieur Poverty, shall I never have the honour of your Company?
My Poverty will disgrace you my Noble Lord.
I were no noble Lord, if virtuous Poverty could dis∣grace me.
Howsoever, your Servants, Friends, and Acquaintance will for∣sake you, if I should wait upon your Lordship.
They may be my Acquaintance, but neither my Friends, nor Servants that will forsake me, for the sake of virtuous Poverty: for though I would not have thee entailed to my line and posterity, nor to live constant∣lie in my family; yet, I am neither ashamed, nor afraid to shake thee by the hand, as long as thou art an honest man; and I desire to take Plenty in own hand, but to serve Poverty with both hands.
May Plenty be always your Lordships Hand-Maid.
And your Reliever Sir.
Sister, be not jealous of me, for I have no design to rob you of your Servant, I study not those Amorous allurements; for I would not be otherwise known unto the Masculine Sex, than Angels are to one another; yet I may respect honour, and admire without a dote∣ing fondness, or a surprised affection, or an incaptivated love.
Yes Sister, when I consider your Virtue, I cannot be Jealous of you, but when I look on your Beauty, I cannot be Confident of my Servant; for Beauty is victorious, and most commonly triumphs in all hearts, binding the Passions, and leading the Affections as Prisoners; and the Thoughts run along as Slaves, and Constancy, if it be not killed in the Battle, yet it is sore wounded, and if it should recover, yet never to the former strength again.
My Lord what say you, hath your Mistress my Sister Amor any reason to be Jealous?
Yes, if my Mistress were any other but her self.
I thank you; for I had rather be killed with civil although dissembling words, than live with rude Inconstancy.
Why, do you think I speak not truth?
I hope your words are marks of truth, for all belief to shoot at.
But Hopes are built on Doubts and Fears, and do you Doubt and Fear my Love?
How can I love without attending Fear, being inseparable?
Pray do not fear; for though there is none that sees your Sister La Belle, but must confess she is most beautiful, yet all fancy not Beauty alike; but were she above what she is, as much as Heaven to Earth, or Gods to Men, yet I am fixed, and not to be removed, no more than is Eternity.
Am not I very fine to day?
Yes very fine.
Do I look handsome to Day?
Yes very handsome.
If I were a Stranger, should I attract your Eyes to take notice of me?
As you are my Cousin, and intimate Friend, and known ac∣quaintance, and see you every day, yet I cannot choose but look on you, and take notice of your rich Garments; but why do you ask, for you do not use to make such questions?
I will tell you, when I was new Married, my Hus∣band took so much notice of my Dress, that the least alteration he observed; nay he grew jealous at it, and thought each curl a snare set to catch Lovers in; after I had been Married some little space of time, he condemned me for carelessness, and desired me to various dresses; and now dressed, or undressed, he never observes; for were I dressed with splendrous light, as glorious as the Sun, or Clouded like dark Night, it were all one to him; neither would strike his Sense; yet I observe he doth observe my Maids, as that one hath a fine Petticoat, and another hath handsome made Shoes, and then he pulls up their Petticoats a little way, to see what stockings they have, and so views them all over, and commends them, saying, they are very fine, when all these Garments he commends on them, were mine, which I had cast off, and given to them; when those Garments though fresh and new, when I did wear them, he no∣ver took notice of; besides, when my Maids do come into the Room where he and I are, he strives to talk his best, as if he wished, and did indea∣four
their good opinion, when only alone with me the rubbish of his dis∣course doth serve the turn.
Madam, I perceive you do begin to be Jealous.
Have I not reason?
No truly; for a Man may do such light actions, or speak merrily, or solidly, without an evil design, only to pass a way idle time.
Lord how idly you speak Cousin, as to think men might idly pass away their time, when Nature allows life no idle time; for all things are growing, or decaying, feeding life, or getting food for to nourish life, or bearing, or breeding for increase; and man which only by his shape exceeds all other Creatures in Reason, Knowledge, and Under∣standing, and will you have him cast away these supreme gifts of Nature with idle time? would you have men follow the Sense only, like a Beast, and not to be guided by reason to some noble study, or profitable action? would you have them yield to their surfeting Appetites, and not endeavour to temper them? is Sickness less painful than Health? is Disorder to be pre∣fer'd before Method, or Inconvenience before Convenience, Wars before Peace, Famine before Plenty, Vice before Virtue? all which would be if idle time weary allowed; for Idleness never found out Arts nor Sciences, or rules of Government, nor the ease of Temperance, nor the profit of Prudence, nor the commands of Fortitude, nor the peace of Justice, which Industry produces; but Idleness brings Confusion.
What hast thou been doing, that thy sword is bloody?
Fighting.
With whom?
I know not.
For what did you fight?
For nothing, or at least as bad as nothing; for that I never saw, nor heard of, nor knew where to find.
This is a strange quarrel, that you neither know the man, nor the cause, it was a mad quarrel.
You say right; for as for my part I had little reason to fight, I know not what my opposite had: but prithee friend go help him, for he lies yonder, and I doubt he is deadly wounded, the whilst I will seek a Chirur∣gion to send to him.
You had need seek one for your self, for you bleed I see by your shirt.
Yes so I will, but it shall be the Lady that was cause of the wounds, and I will try if her Beauty can heal them.
My sweet Mistress, what is the cause you look so pale and Melancholy?
I hear you have forsaken me, and making love to another; which I no sooner heard, but shook with fear, like to a tender Plant blown by a Northern wind, wherewith my blood congealed with cold, my thoughts grew sad, and gathered like black Clouds, which makes my head hang down, my face all withered pale and dry: but did I love, as many do, for Per∣son, not for Mind, your Inconstancy would be a less Crime; but were your Body as curious made, as Natures skill could form you, and not a Soul an∣swerable, I might Admire you, but not Love you with adoration as I do.
Fear no•: for as thy Tongue unlocks my Ears, so it locks up my Heart from all thy Sex but thee, and as a Cabinet doth keep thy Picture there.
Heaven grant my Tongue may never rust, but move with words, as smoothed with Oil, turned by the strength of Wit, easy and free.
Dear Mistress banish this Jealousy, it may in time corrupt pure love, and be you confident of my Affection, as of your own Virtue.
Your kind words I will take for a sufficient Seal, and never doubt the Bond that Love hath made.
I will go fetch more help and Surgeons.
I am wounded more with thoughts of Sorrow, than with my opposites Sword, and wish that Death would strike me in thy Arms, that I might breath my last there, offer up my Soul upon the Altar of thy Breast, and yield my life a Sacrifice unto thy Constancy.
May Death exchange, and take my life that is use∣less to the World, and spare yours, for noble actions to build a fame thereon.
Speak not so.
If my words offend you, my tongue for ever shall be Dumb.
No, it is your Wish offends, and not your Words; for they are Music to my Ears, or like to drops of Balsam powered therein to heal my wounded Soul.
If that my words could cure your wounds that bleed, rather than want, isle speak till all my breath were spent, no life to form words with.
Why do you weep?
To see you bleed; but if you bleed to Death, I will weep to Death; and as life issues through your Wounds, so shall life issue through my Eyes, and drown it self in floods of tears.
Forbear, let not the Earth drink up those tears, those precious tears the Gods thirst after.
Venus thou Goddess fair, for thy Sons sake,
Cupped the God of Love, O let me make
A Banquet of sweet Wit to entertain
This Noble Company, and feast each brain;
And let each several Ear feed with delight,
Not be disturbed with foul malicious spite.
Noble and Right Honourable,
I shall take my discourse at this time out of Beauty, the ground of which discourse is Eyes; Eyes are the Beauty of Beauty; for if the Eyes be not good, the face though ne'er so fair, or otherwise well featured, cannot be pleasing; the truth is, Eyes are the most Curious, Ingenious, Delightful; and Profit∣ble work in Nature; Curious in the Aspect and Splendour; Ingenious in the form and fashion, Delightful in the Society, and Profitable in their Com∣merce, Trade, and Traffic, that they have with all the rest of Natures works: for had not Nature made Eyes, all her works had been lost, as be∣ing buried in everlasting darkness; for it is not only Light that shows her works, but Eyes that see her works: wherefore if Nature had not made Eyes she had lost the glory of Admiration and Adoration, which all her Animal Creatures give her, begot, raised, or proceeding from what they see; besides, not only Light the presenter of objects would have been lost, but Life would have been but only a dull Melancholy Motion for want of sight, and for want of sight life would have wanted knowledge, and so would have been ignorant both of its self and Nature; but now life takes delight by the fight, through the Eyes, and is enamoured with the Beauties it
views; and the Eyes do not only delight themselves and life with what they receive, but with what they send forth; for Eyes are not only passages to let Light, Colours, Forms, and Figures in, but to let Passions, Affections, Opine∣once out; besides, the Eyes are not only as Navigable Seas, for the Animal Spirits to Traffic on, and Ports to Anchor in; but they are the Gardens of the Soul, wherein the Soul sits and refreshes it self, and Love the Sun of the Soul, sends forth more glorious Rays than that Sun in the Sky, and on those objects they do shine, they both comfort and give a nourishing delight; but yet when the light of love doth reflect, the heat doth increase by double lines, and quickness of motion, which causes many times a Distemper of the Thoughts, which turns to a Feavor in the Mind; but to conclude most Noble and Right Honourable, Eyes are the Stars which appear only in the Animal Globe, to direct the life in its Voyage, not only to places that life knows, but to new discoveries; and these Animal Stars do not only guide the Animal life, but have an influence and various effects on the Soul, and are not only to view the Beauties of all the other works of Nature, but are the chiefest Beauties themselves; and if that Reason that is the Educator of the Life, and chief Ruler and Commander of the Soul, did not cross and hinder the influence of these Animal Stars, they would prove very fatal to many a one: Wherefore Right Honourable, my Application is, that you obey Reason, and pray unto it as to a Deity, that it may divert the Malig∣nant influences, and cause them to point to a Happy Effect.
For which my good wishes shall attend you,
That the Gods of these Stars may defend you.
Brother, I may bid you welcome home, for I have not seen you these two years; methinks between Brothers as you and I are should never be absence.
No faith Brother; for we never have good fortune when we are asunder; for since I patted I hear you are to be Married, and I must tell you, I am like to be Hanged.
Heaven forbid you should be hanged.
And do not you make the same Prayer against your Mar∣riage?
No, for that prayer would prove a Curse, if Heaven should grant it, but I hope Brother you speak of this but merrily, and not as a truth to believed that you are like to be hanged.
Yes faith, I met with a man that was resolved to fight with the next he met, I think, for he forced a quarrel, and we fought, and I fear I have killed him.
What was the cause of the quarrel?
Why about a Beauty, that none must admire but himself, and yet they must maintain she is the absolutest Beauty of her Sex; and such a Beauty, I hear of every where, but I cannot see her any where.
Let me tell you Brother she is worth the seeing.
And is she worth the blood and life that is lost and spilt for her?
Yes, if it had been to maintain her Beauty against rude Despi∣sers, or her Virtue against base Detractors, or her Honour against wicked Violators; for her Soul hath as many beautiful graces and Virtues, and her mind as many noble qualities, as her body hath beautiful Parts, Lineaments, graceful Motions, pleasing Countenances, lovely Behaviour, and courteous Demeanours.
Certainly Brother you are very well acquainted with her, that you know her so well, as to speak so confident of her.
Yes Brother, I do know her very well, for she is Sister to my Mistress.
So, I thought she had some relation to you, that you spake so much in her praise; this Self-love bribes all our Tongues; but Brother, you have so fired my Spirits, as I am almost as mad as the Gentleman I fought with, before I see her, merely with the report, and since I must lose my Wits with the rest of Mankind, for I find all are mad that come within the list of her Name, pray let me part with my Wits on Honourable terms, as at the view of her Beauty.
I shall make it a request to her that you may see her, and she being a person who is very obliging, I make no question but she will receive your civil and humble respects.
Husband do you love me?
Yes.
Better than any other Woman?
I can make no comparison.
Why do you then neglect me so much, as to take no notice whether I be fine and brave, or ragged, or patched, or ilfavour∣ed, or handsome, and yet you take notice of every other woman, from the stranger abroad, to the Kitchin-Maid at home?
By my troth Wife I do so just as I would do of a Tree, or a Bush, or a Stone, or a Brake, or a Fox, or an Ass, and no otherwise.
Yet it is a sign you have them in your mind, and I had rather be hated than forgotten; wherefore pray let me be some∣times in your thoughts, although as a Brier, and not to be flung out Root and Branch.
Heaven forbid Wife you should become a Thorn in my Mind, but thou art there as my Soul, nor do I love you at a common rate: for were thy person more deformed than ever Nature made, either by Sickness or Casualty, I still should love thee for thy Virtuous Soul; and though your person is very handsome, yet I consider not your Beauty but your Health, so you be well, I care not how you look; for my love is at that height as it is beyond the body grown; for should I only love you for your Beauty, when that is decayed, my love must of necessity die, if Beauty were the life.
So then I am only your spiritual love, and you will choose a temporal one elsewhere.
Prithee be not Jealous of me, because I am become assured of your Chastity; for know. I could sooner hate my self, than love, or amorously affect any other woman but thy self; and when I prove false to you, may Iupiter cast me to Plutoes Court, there to be tormented Eternally.
Well, pardon this sit of Jealousy, for I shall no∣ver question your affection more, nor doubt your Constancy.
To quarrel and fight for me is strange, for as for the one I never saw, and the other I have no acquaintance with; but had I favoured the one, or affronted the other, or had favoured them both, it might have raised a dispute, from a dispute to a quarrel, from a quarrel to a duel; but many times men make a seeming love the occasi∣on to show their courage, to get a fame; but what fame soever men get, the woman loses, as being thought either too kind, or cruel.
Sister, this Gentleman never saw you, only fought in his own defence; he desires you would give him leave to come and kiss your hands, he is a very gallant man, and an experienced Soldier.
A Soldier? why he never lead an Army, nor pitched a Field, nor fought a Battle; he never Entrenched, nor Encamped; he never guarded, kept, nor took Fort, Town, or City; perchance he hath studied as most Gentlemen do, so much of Fortification, as to talk of Trenches, Lines, Ramparts, Bullworks, Curtains, Wings, Faces, Forts, Centuries; And of Ammunition, Cannon, Muskets, Carbines, Pistols, Slings, Bows, Arrows, Darts, Pikes, Bills, Halberds, Bolts, Poleaxes, Swords, Ci∣meters, Shot, Bullets, Powder, Drums, Trumpets, Waggons, Tents and the like; and for Arms, Pot, Back, Breast, Gantlets, Corselers, Gorgets and the like, thus they learn the Names, but seldom practice the use.
Yes, this Gentleman hath lead Armies, pitched Fields, fought Battles, where those he won were won by his Prudence and Conduct, and those he lost were by Fortunes spite, whose changing power, and inconstant humour, no Mortal can withstand.
Nay Sister, if he be so gallant a person, I shall not refuse his visits, nor deny my self his Company, but entertain him as civilly as he may deserve.
Well met, I was going to your Lodging.
Faith if you had gone to my Lodging you had mist of my Company.
But howsoever, I should have been entertained by thy old Land∣lady, for she makes me welcome in thy absence.
The truth of it is, that my Landlady as old as she is, loves the Company of men, especially of young men; for if a young man will trow∣ble himself to stay in her Company, and talk to her, she is so pleased, as she makes more wrinkles with her smiles, than Time hath made, and she will simperingly put in her Chin, as if she were but fifteen.
Faith I commend women, for they will never yield to ages hue∣morse, though they are forced to yield to ages infirmities; for their minds are always young, though their bodies be old.
Indeed their minds are Girls all their life time; but leaving old women, will you go see Monsieur Fantasy?
Is he so well as to admit of Visitors?
Yes, for he is in a recovering condition, and state of Health.
Come let us go then.
Madam, the fame of your Beauty and Virtue hath drawn me hither, to offer my service on the altar of your commands.
You are so great a favourite to Nature and For∣tune, and are so splenderous with their gifts, as you are able to put the confi∣dence of our Sex out of Countenance, especially I, that am by Nature bash∣full; wherefore it is unlikely I should command you.
I had rather be commanded by you Lady, than to com∣mand the whole World, and should be prouder to be your Slave, than to be that sole Monarch.
I should be sorry so gallant a man as fame reports
you to be; should have so sick a Judgment, and so ungoverned a Passion, as to yield up your liberty to a woman, and to tie your life to her vain fool∣each humours.
It is impossible that in so heavenly a form, a foolish Soul should be; for I perceive by your beautiful person, Nature hath out∣wrought her self, having not Art or skill to make a Second, and what man would not be proud to serve the only she?
O Sir, take heed you wrong not your noble worth and merit, in being over civil; for complements are all dissembling, and dissembling runs in the ways of perjury.
Pray Madam construe not my love-service and admire∣tion to an idle Visit, a vain Discourse, and false Profession; for if you ap∣pear not so beautiful to all the World, as you appear to me, yet I dare boldly tell the world, I think you so, and will maintain it with my life.
I believe then I am more beholding to your Eyes that have contracted me into a beautiful form, than unto Nature that hath made me of a vulgar shape.
Your Tongue Lady hath the power of Circes wand, to charm the Senses, and transform the shape, making all men it speaks to, ei∣there to appear Monsters or Gods.
You have Enthroned me with your Favours, and Crowned me with your Commendations.
My desire is, that you will Crown me with your Love.
I hear that Mademoiselle Bon shall marry her inconstant Ser∣vant, Monsieur Fantasy.
Faith that is a comfort, that any woman can get a Husband, whilst the Graces are young and in being.
The Graces never grow old.
Let me tell you, Time decays and withers all things.
No, not the Gods.
But Time doth waste Devotion, wears out Religion, burns up the Sacrifice of Praise, puts out the Lamp of Charity, and quenches out the Vestal fire of Zeal.
But then there are new Religions brought in the place or room of the old
Yes, and new Gods with new Religions, and new Religions and Opinions are like young beautiful Ladies when they appear first to the view of the World; they are followed, admired, worshipped, sought, sued, and prayed to; but when they grow old, all their Servants and followers forsake them, and seek out those that are younger: so the last and newest Opinions and Religions, are accounted the best, and stuck to for a time the
closest, and followed by the greatest numbers, and have most zealous sup∣plicants; thus the Gods die in effect.
The truth is, that all things that are young, are Strong, Vi∣gorous, Active and Flourishing; and whatsoever is old, is Weak, Faint, Sick, and witheringly dyes.
I can tell you news.
What news?
Why Monsieur Nobilissimo to is marry Mademoiselle Amor, and his Brother Monsieur Heroic is to marry her Sister Mademoiselle La Belle.
And who is to marry the third Sister Mademoiselle Grand Esprit.
She is resolved to live a single life.
I am glad they have chose Husbands out of the numbers of there Suitors; for when they are married, I hope out of the number of there remainders, we may have some offers for Husbands.
For my part I shall despair, unless the third Sister Madamoi∣sell Grand Esprit would marry also; for the whole bulk of Mankind will sue to her, and never think of any other woman, whilst she is indisposed of.
But she it seems hath declared she will never marry.
That is all one, for men will pursue their desires, and live of Hopes so long, as there is any left.
Well, the worst come to the worst, we shall only live old Maids.
But not old Virgins.
Great Hymen, I do now petition thee,
To bless my Sisters, not to favour me;
Unless I were thy subject to obey,
But I am Diana's and to her do pray;
But give me leave for to decide the cause,
And for to speak the truth of marriage laws;
Or else through ignorance each man and wife,
May rebels prove by Matrimonial strife.
Noble and Right Honourable,
From the root of Self-love grows many several Branches; as Divine, Love, Moral Love, Natural and Sympathetical Love, Neighbourly and Ma∣trimonial Love; Divine Love is the Love to the Gods, Moral Love is the
Love to Virtue, Natural Love is the Love to Parents and Children, Sympa∣thetical Love is of Lovers, or Friendships, Neighbourly Love is the Love of Acquaintance, and true Matrimonial Love is the Love of United Souls, and Bodies; but I shall only insist or discourse at this time for my Sisters sakes, of Matrimonial Love; this Matrimonial Love, is the first embodied Love that Nature created; for as for Divine Love, and Moral Love, they are as incorporeal as the Soul, and Sympathetical and Matrimonial Love, which I will join as Soul and Body, were before Natural, or Neighbourly Love, for Marriage beget, Acquaintance, and none lives so near nor converses so much as man and wife; and there was a Sympathy and Conjunction of each Sex, before there were Children, and there could be no Parents before there were Children; thus Matrimonial Love was the first substantial Love, and being the Original and producing Love, ought to be honoured and preferred as the most perfect and greatest Love in Nature; but mistake me not Noble and Right Honourable, when I say the greatest Love in Nature, I mean not the Supernatural Love, as Divine Love as to the Gods; but this Matrimonial Love, I say is to be the most respected, as the Original Love, like as Nature is to be honoured and preferred before the Creatures she makes; so Matri∣monial Love ought to be respected first, as being the cause of Friendly, So∣ciable, Neighbourly, and Fatherly Love; wherefore man and wife ought to forsake all the world, in respect of each other, and to prefer no other delight before each others good or content; for the Love of Parents and Children, or any other Love proceeding from Nature, ought to be waved when as they come in Competition with the Love man and wife; for though Matri∣monial Love is not such a Divine Love as from man to the Gods, yet it is as the Love of Soul and Body, also it is as a Divine Society, as being a Union; but Right Honourable, to tell you, my opinion is, that I believe very few are truly married; for it is not altogether the Ceremony of the Church nor State that makes a true marriage; but a Union and indissoluble Conjunction of Souls and Bodies of each Sex; wherefore all those that are allowed of as man and wife, by the Church, State, and Laws, yet they are but Adul∣terers, unless their Souls, Bodies, and Affections, are united as one; for its not the joining of hands, speaking such words by Authentical persons, nor making of vows, and having Witnesses thereof, that makes a true marriage, no more than an Absolution without a Contrition, makes a holy man: wherefore dear Sisters, and you two Heroic Worthies, marry as you ought to do, or else live single lives, otherwise your Children will be of a Bastard kind, and your associating but as Beasts, which are worse than Birds, for they orderly choose their Mates, and lovingly fly and live together, and equally labour to build their nest, to feed their young, and Sympathetically live, and love each other, which order and love few married persons obe∣serve, nor practice; but after all this, even those marriages that are the per∣fastest, purest, lovingest, and most equallest, and Sympathetically joined, yet at the best marriage is but the womb of trouble, which cannot be avoided, also marriage is the grave or tomb of Wit; for which I am resolved for my part to live a single life, associating my self with my own Thoughts, marrying my self to my own Contemplations, which I hope to conceive and bring forth a Child of Fame, that may live to posterity, and to keep a-live my Memory; not that I condemn those that marry, for I do worship married persons, as accounting them Saints, as being Martyrs for the good cause of the Common-wealth, Sacrificing their own Happiness and Tranquillity,
for the weal public; for there is none that marries that doth not increase their Cares and Pains; but marriage Unites into Families, Families into Villages, Villages into Cities, Cities into Corporations, Corporations into Commonwealths; this increase keeps up the race of Mankind, and causes Commerce, Trade, and Traffic, all which associates men into an Agree∣meant, and by an Agreement men are bound to Laws, by Laws they are bound to Punishments, by Punishments to Magistrates, and by Magistrates and Punishments to Obedience, by Obedience to Peace and Defence, in which Center of Peace my dear Sisters, I wish you may live, and be guarded with the Circumference of Defence, that nothing may disturb or endanger you or yours; and that you may live in true marriage,and increase with united love, blessed with Virtuous Children, and enriched with prudent Care, and Industry: also I wish and pray that Jealousy may be banished from your Thoughts, Pains and Sickness from your Bodies, Poverty from your Fami∣lies, evil Servants from your Employments, Disobedience from your Children.
And that Death may not rob you of your breed,
But after your life your Children may succeed.
O How my heart doth ache when think I do,
How I a modest Maid a man did woo!
To be so confident to woo him here,
Upon the public Stage to every Ear;
Men sure will censure me for mad, if not
To be in some unlucky Planet got,
Or else will tax me of dishonesty,
As seeming like a bold immodesty;
Well, I have wooed, yet am I not despised,
But am by Virtuous honour highly prized;
Because my Love was spotless, pure, and Chaste,
And on a noble worthy man was placed;
Then why should I blush, weep, or yet repent,
Or shun the wooing part to represent,
But rather joy and glory in my choice?
If you approve my Act pray gived a voice•

My Masters Nephew, and my Ladies Daughter, are the kindest lovers, for so young ones, as that ever I knew.
I believe you never knew such young ones; for she is not above ten years of age, and 〈◊〉 thirteen or fourteen.
He addresses himself in that Country manner, and pleads his Love-sure with such affectionate respect, and she gives Audience with such modest attention, as one would think they were older by a dozen years apiece than they are.
They have been bred together, and they have not been acquainted with the Vanities and Vices of the World, which makes love the more pure.
My Lady desires my Master that he would give consent his Nephew may marry her Daughter.
She hath reason, for he is the only Son of his Father, my Masters Brother the Lord Dorato, who is very rich, and is in great favour with the Arch-Prince of the Country.
Why so is my Ladies Daughter the only Child of her Parents, and she is Heir to her Fathers Estate.
Yes, but her Father left so many Debts when he dyed, as the Estate will not be so great as it is thought to be.
But by that time she is of Age, the Debts may be paid.
But my Lady hath a great Jointure out of it, that will be a hen∣drance to the payment ôf Debts.
Well, I believe whether they have their friends consent or not, they will marry, they love so very much each other.
Perchance so, and then repent when they come to elder years, that they married so young.
Faith that they may do if they were double their Age; for few marry that repent not:
Well come away, and leave them to repentance.
Nay stay, they are not married yet.
Pray Husband give your Nephew leave to marry my Daughter.
Time enough Wife, they are young, and may stay this seven years, and indeed they are so young as it is not fit they should marry; besides, I have not absolute power to dispose of my Nephew: for though my Brother left him to my care and breeding when he went Am∣bassadour to the Emperor, because his Wife was dead, and none so fit to leave him with as I; yet to marry him without his Fathers Knowledge, or Consent, will not be taken well, nay perchance he may be very angry.
Come, come, he will not displease you with his anger, for fear he may lose that you have power to give from him, which is your Estate, which you may leave to him, or his Son, having no Children of your own; where∣fore pray Husband grant my request.
Well wife, I will consider it.
Nay if you consider, you will find so many excuses, as you will deny my request with excuse.
Faith if I do consent to this marriage, it will be to be rid of my Nephews and your importunity.
You may be sure we will never let you be quiet.
I believe you.
Nan, give me my work, and my little armed Chair.
Lord Mistress, you take great pains to crowd into that Chair, I wonder you can take delight to sit so uneasily.
O, custom is a second Nature; for I using to sit in this Chair from my Childhood, I have a Natural Love to it, as to an old acquaintance; and being accustomed to sit in it, it feels ea∣sier
than any other seat, for use and custom makes all things easy, when that we are unaccustomed to, is difficult and trow∣blossom; but I take so much delight to sit and work, or Sing old Ballads in this Chair, as I would not part from it for any thing.
Yes, you would part with your little old Chair for a proper young Husband, who would set you on his knees.
By my faith but I would not, for I should find more trouble and less case on a young Husbands knees, than on my old Chairs Seat.
But if you should sit in this Chair when you were married, your Husband must kneel down if he would kiss you.
Why then this Chair will learn a Husband hum∣ble submission and obedience, which Husbands never knew; but Nan, prithee fetch me some of my old Ballads to sing, for I am weary of working.
Mistress, your Mother calls you.
I had as lieve be whipped as stir.
You have reason, you labour so much, and ring your self so hard, as whipping would be less pain; for your Chair is now sitter for your Head, than your Britch.
Not unless to break my head; for a Chair is not a fit rest for the head, for then the heels would be upwards, and so I might be thought a Light-heeld wench; for light things fly, or lie upwards.
Why the head, that is the uppermost part of the body, is not light.
Yes, when it is mad or drunk.
How doth my Brother and my Son?
Very well my Lord.
How is this? my Son married to my Brothers Wives Daughter, without my Knowledge or Consent? to a Girl whose Estate hath more Debts than Lands? and who knows how she will prove when she is a woman; and my Son to marry a wife, before he hath wit to govern a wife; to put a clog to his heels to hinder his Travel for Knowledge; sure my Brother is mad, dotingly mad, to be persuaded by a foolish woman his wife; for I know it was her insinuating persuasions that made him agree to the marriage; O I could curse the time I sent my Son to him! and my self for trusting him to educate and govern him, who hath bred him to be as foolish as himself. O foolish Son, and more foolish Brother, by how much being older! but I will break the marriage-knot asunder, or disinherit my Son, or marry and get another that may prove more wise and happy to me; Do you know of my Sons marriage?
Yes Sir, for tic much talked of, and of the extraordinary love betwixt the young couple.
A couple of young Puppies, and their Uncle an old Else; O the very thought doth almost make me mad; especially when I remem∣ber the hopes I had to advance my Son by marriage; but you shall go back to carry Letters that shall declare my anger, and my command, for my Sons repair unto me, since I cannot return home as yet; isle dispatch you strait.
It is a very pleasing sight to see the new married Children I may say, for so are they; yet they behave themselves so gravely, and so formally, as if they were an Ancoret couple; for there is no appearance of Childish∣nos in their behaviour.
But I wonder my Master and Lady will suffer them to bed together.
My Master did persuade his Nephew to lie by himself, but he would not be persuaded.
Truly he is a very fine youth, and she a very pretty young Lady; I dare say she will, make a very handsome woman.
I believe she will and a virtuous woman, and he a handsome and gallant man.
So Wife, by your persuasions to this marriage, I have lost the love of my only Brother.
And I am like to lose my only Child, through the grief of the de∣parture of her Husband; for she looks so pale, and is so weak with crying, and fasting; for she feeds only on grief, and her tears quenches her droughth: I think she will die.
It is your own fault; for you would never be quiet, nor let be at rest until they were married.
Would I and my Child had never seen your Nephew.
All the hopes we have is, that my Brother will be pa∣cified with time.
I never saw so much affectionate grief, as at the parting of the young married couple.
O, passionate tears flow naturally from Childrens Eyes.
When they were to part, they did kiss, weep, and embrace so close, as their tears mixed together.
They will weep as much for joy when they meet again, as they do now for grief at parting.
But absence and time doth waste Love.
Absence doth rather put out the flame of Love, than waste the Lamp; but their Love was lighted so soon, that if it be not put out, it will last a long time.
Nay faith, the sooner it is lighted the sooner it will burn out; but to make Love last long, is sometimes to put it out, and then to re-inkindle it; for a continual fire doth waste the fuel, and a Candle will soon burn out, although it be lighted but at one end; but absence is an extinguishet, which saves it, and return is relighting it.
Are Lovers like Candles?
Yes faith; for as there are Candles of all sorts and sizes, so there are Lovers of all degrees; some are like Torch-light that flame high and bright, but soon waste out, others like watch Candles that give but a dim dull light, but will last a long time, and some that give but a little light, and are strait burnt out.
But what is á snast in a Candle, which is like a blazing Star with a stream or tail, that mels a Candle, and makes it run out.
Faith a snast is like a Mistress, as a Courtesan, or servant, that makes waste of Matrimonial Love, it makes Matrimonial Love fall into a snuf; but prudent discretion, and chaste kisses, are as snuffers to clip of those snasts be∣fore they get power, or are in a blaze, or like a Bodkin that picks or pulls them out with the point of a sharp tongue.
By your similizing, you make love Grease.
You say right, for there is nothing so apt to flame and melt, as Grease and Love, it is there natural properties to waste in flame.
Well, but let us not waste our time in idle talk, but go about our employments.
Why, talking is the greatest, or most employment women use; but indeed love is idle.
My Lord is extremely troubled for the marriage of his Son.
He is so, and so very angry with his Son, as he would not give him his blessing when he came, although he hath not seen him in seven years; for so long hath my Lord been Ambassador here.
Sometimes Ambassadors are many years employed out of there own Country.
They are so, but my Lord is sent for home, which I am very glad of.
Doth his Son return home with him?
No, for he sends him to travel into several Countries, for as many years as my Lord hath been from his Country.
Why doth he command him so long a time to Travel, having no more Sons?
To have him Travel out the remembrance of his Wife, at least his affections to her.
Why, would not my Lord have his Son love his Wife, now he is married?
No, for my Lord saith that the marriage is not a true marriage; for the Lady is not of marrigable years, and that is not until the Female is past twelve.
Why so?
I know not, but so it is according to our Canon, and Com∣mon Laws.
I hear my Brother hath sent his Son to Travel for seven years.
Pray do not let my Daughter know it, for it will kill her, if she hears it.
I hear also, that he will endeavour to break the marriage.
The Devil break his heart.
Why do you say so?
Have I not reason to say so, when he endeavours to break my Child's heart, and so my heart? a dishonest man he is, to offer to part man and wife.
But if the marriage will not hold good in law, they are not lawful man and wife.
I perceive you will take your Brothers part against me.
Mistress, I hear there is a Suitor preparing to come a wooing to you.
What preparations doth he make?
Why he hath been with your Father, to treat with him concerning your Portion.
That is not a Suitors preparation, that is a Mer∣chants Trafficking, that is to make a bargain, not to woo a Mistress; but the preparations of a Suitor, are fine Clothes, Coaches, and great Attendance, with rich presents; otherwise a woman is not wooed, but a Husband bought.
Or a Wife sold.
No, the woman or her friends are the purchasers; for Husbands never give any thing for a Wife, but the woman or her friends, pay down ready money for a Husband, although they sell Land for it: Portions, portions undo a Family Nan.
But for all that, you had rather undo a Family than want a Husband.
Self-love is prevalent Nan; but what manner of man is this man that my Father is treating with? is he handsome, or rich, or famous, or honoured with title? for I would not put my father to charge∣es, and not have a Husband worth my Portion.
He is rich, and a thriving man.
That is to say a rich miserable man, and when I am married to him, I shall be his poor miserable wife; for he will not al∣low me any thing to spend, hardly to eat.
Then your Chair will be big enough for you.
Or I shall be little enough for my Chair, for a spare diet will make bare bones.
If you be lean you will want a Cushion, unless your Husband will allow you one.
A miserable Husband will never do that, for they think ease breeds Idleness.
If he be miserable, he will be pleased you shall be idle; for exercise doth cause a hungry Stomach; but if he be a jealous Husband, he will not be pleased you should be idle; for idleness breeds wantonness.
A jealous Husband and a miserable, is to a woman much alike; for the one bars a wife from Company, the other from Meat; the one will not allow her fine Clothes, the other dares not let her wear fine Clothes; the one will not maintain Servants to wait on her, the other dares not trust Servants to wait upon her, lest they should be corrupted to
be Pimps or Bawds; also a miserable Husband, and a Prodigal one is alike to a wife; the one keeps all his wealth and spends none, the other spends all and keeps none; the one will give his wife none, the other will spare his wife none from himself, and Vanities and Vices; thus a wife is poor, or unhappy, either in a spender, or a sparer; but if my Father would not cast me and my Portion away, is to marry me to a man whose bounty or liberality is within one part of his wealth, as three parts liberality, and four parts wealth; and one that hath more love than jealousy, more merit than title, more honesty than wealth, and more wealth than necessity.
But if you never marry till your Father get you such a Husband, you will die an old Maid.
I had rather die an old Maid, than be an unhap∣pie Wife.
Why are you angry with me? because my Brother is an enemy to the marriage, I was a Friend to it, and did my part, con∣scenting to what you desired, and why are you angry with me? because the Laws have disanulled the marriage, I cannot alter the Laws.
But your Brothers power with the Arch-Prince, and the Arch-Princes power on the Judges and Lawyers, Divines and Church-men, hath corrupted the Laws, and caused Injustice.
That's none of my fault, I have not power to mend them; but let me have so much power with you, as to persuade you to be patient, in matters where your impatience will do you no good; also let me Counsel you to advise your Daughter to endeavour to forget my Nephew, at least not to love him as a Husband, but to place her affections upon some other man; for she being freed by the law, may marry again who she shall think best to choose: And to draw her off from her Melancholy humour, you must persuade her to divert her self and thoughts with variety of Company, and to take delight in such things as other Ladies use, as fine Dressing, rich Clothing, sportful Dancing, merry Meeting, and the like; and she being very handsome, since she is grown to women's years, will be admired, praised, and sued too, in which admirations and praises, women take glory, and are proud to be wooed; for it is the pleasure of their life, and the life of their pleasure.
But how if I cannot persuade her to associate her self with young Company like her self, or to wear fine Clothes, or to take pleasure in sports and plays?
Command her to adorn her self bravely, and to go to Balls, Plays, and Masks, and those pleasures will steal on her unawares; and no question but a little time will make her take such delight therein, as she will be so fond of Company and Bravery, as you will find it difficult, if not impossible to persuade her from it.
I will take your Counsel, and follow your advice.
My Lord hath sent for his Son to come home, for to marry with the Arch-Prince's Niece.
She is a Lady that hath more Wealth than Beauty, and more Title than Wit.
My Lord cares not to marry his Son to Beauty or Wit, but to Riches and Honour.
My Lord is Covetous and Ambitious.
So are all wise men: for they know that Wealth and Honour are the Pillars and Supporters, to hold up their Families; that makes Fathers desirous, and industrious to marry their Sons to great Fortunes, and not to great Beam•yes, that their successors may not be buried in Poverty; for Beauty is only for delight, but not for continuance, Beauty lives only with fond Youth, Riches with wife Age, and Dignity Crowns ancient Riches; for along and rich succession, is a Gentleman's Pedigree.
I thought Merit had been the foundation of a Gentleman.
So it is sometimes, but not always: for where Merit Digni∣fied one Family, Riches Dignified a hundred; poor Merit is buried in Obe∣livion, unless Fame builds him a Monument, whereas Riches build Monu∣mints to Fems Palace, and bring Fame down to his Palace; but Merit without the assistance of Riches, can neither feed, nor cloth, nor sustain, nor cannot buy Houses to live in, nor Lands to live on, it cannot leave anything for Antiquity but the memory of it self: wherefore my Lord is wise to ch•se Riches for his Son.
But it is a question whether his Son will take them, and leave the Lady be once was married too; for it is said that she is grown an extraor∣denariate Beauty.
Will not you obey my commands?
Yes Madam, so far as it is my duty.
Then do as I command you, dress fine, and keep Com∣pany.
Gay Cloths Madam, and my mind will not be suitable; my indisposed humour, and Company will not be agreeable; neither know I how to behave my self in this condition I am in, nor how to associate my self; for since my marriage is disanuled, I am neither Maid, Virgin, Wi∣dow, nor Wife.
Come, come, you are my Daughter, that's sufficient.
Faith I pity my young Lord, for since he is returned from his tedious travels, he is kept Prisoner at the Court, for the Arch-Prince and his Father will not suffer him to stir out, no not so much as out his Lodgings; but that's not all, for they will not suffer him to think, for their Tongues disturb all his Meditations, the one fills his Ears and Head with promises, the other rants in threats; the Prince strives to hire him with Wealth and Honour, to marry his Niece, and his Father stands ready, if he denies, to load him with Curses.
The Princes Hire will sooner bring him to consent than the Fa∣theirs Load.
Son, if you disobey my commands concerning this marriage, as to refuse it, by heavens fair light I swear I will load you with so many Curses, as shall sink you down to Hell.
By Heavens fair light I swear, I wish I were covered with the darkness of Death; but my Fathers Curses may exclude me from Heavens blessings.
My Lord, your Father desires your presence.
O Nan, I have had such a misfortune as no∣ver was.
What misfortune?
Why, I was sitting in that little Chair you know I take delight to sit in, and was singing of Ballads, not expecting that any stran∣ger would come into my Chamber without my notice; but as I was sitting and singing, in comes my Father and the Gentleman you told me of, that was to be my Husband, whereat I was so surprised, as I forgot the Chair was so little I could not readily part from it; I started up in a fright, and run away, the Chair being so little in the seat, stood so close to me, as it went along with me, and my back being towards my Father and the Gentle∣man, saw the Chair as it stuck to me; the Gentleman seeing the Chair hanging there, told my Father, that he p•rceived that I his Daughter was of so lazy a Nature, that rather than stay or want a seat, I would have a Chair tied to my breech; whereupon he hath broke the agreement he made with my Father, and my Father for anger hath vowed to break or burn my Chair. O Nan, what shall I do to save my Chair? for to lose both Chair and Hus∣band will be too great a loss.
Which had you rather lose, the Gentleman or the Chair?
O the Gentleman Nan, for he will not do me half so much service as the Chair hath done me; he will never bear with me as the Chair hath bore me; and I perceive by his she humour, and Court∣os Nature, that he would sooner break my head with a Chair, than ease my hips with a Seat, therefore good Nan devise some way to save my Chair from Execution, and the fates I hope as a blessing to me, have made the Chair a means to break the marriage betwixt this Gentleman and me.
It seems he loves an active wife.
Faith all Fools love busy women.
The best way, is to speak to your Mother to pacify your Father.
I will take your advice.
And is he married? Heavens send him joy, and me pa∣tience; Heaven Crown his life with Happiness, and mine with Peace; and may he have posterity that may live long, and flourish high, that may keep alive his memory, though I should be forgotten in the grave, yet Hey∣ven grant his fame may live eternally.
Daughter, have you heard of your Husbands marriage?
Yes Madam.
It is reported that the Princess whom he is married to, is ill-favoured, foolish, and peevish.
He is too wise to consider outward favour, and for wit he hath enough for himself and his wife, and his sweet and noble Nature and behaviour will equalise her peevish humour.
There are Balls, Masks, and Plays, to be extraordinary, for the joy of this marriage; wherefore Daughter I desire you to adorn your self, and appear in those Assemblies.
I shall obey you Madam.
I wonder your Lordship should be so Melancholy, that hath wealth at will, it is enough for such poor men as I to be Melancholy.
I would thou had my wealth, so I had thy freedom.
O Sir, there is no Freedom in Poverry.
Nor no Poverty in Freedom, for freedom is the wealth of the Gods.
If it pleased the Gods, would I was bound to Riches.
I wish thou were, so I was free of my Princesses Shackels.
Husband, the Arch-Prince hath sent a Messenger to give us notice he will come and visit my Daughter.
I hear he is much enamoured with your Daughters Beauty, since he saw her at the last Ball.
I will go to her, and make her dress her self fine to entertain him.
Her Beauty is bravery enough, wherefore she needs no other adornment but what Nature hath dressed her in.
But Art gives additions.
The Emperor I hear is sending Ambassadors to the Arch-Prince, to treat of a marriage betwixt the Arch-Prince and the Em∣perors Daughter.
The report is, that she is a fair and Virtuous Lady, and the Prince will have great advantages by the alliance with the Emperor.
He will so, wherefore I hope and pray, that the match may be for the good of this Kingdom.
Fair Lady, grant me your love and I will ask no more, but what accompanies it, your person, which I will make an equal to my self.
Gracious Sir, had I a Virgins Love, and Person pure to equal it, I would present it to your Highness; but both my Love and Per∣son have been wedded unto another m•n, and though the Law hath made a divorce, yet Death hath not dissolved the marriage.
Heaven hath given you Virtue, which keeps your person pure, and like a precious Diamond doth remain; for though it hath or should have several purchasers, yet doth it lose nothing of its value or worth; and though you have been wedded to another man, your Virtuons Chastity; is still as pure as in your Virgins Estate, and by the Laws your person is set free; and for the Love you gave, may be called back, or drawn away, since it is not entertained.
It is true, I am Chaste, and so I will remain, and though the law hath set my person free, my conscience is not yet •t liberty, nor will that love I gave away return, no more than life that's past rise from the Urn; wherefore most noble Sir, ask me not for that which I have not to give you.
Equal consent, makes a happy marriage; wherefore I de∣sire your free consent; but know, if you refuse, it tic in my power to have you without your consent, either for a Mistress, or for a Wife.
You have no power, the power lives within my self; for I can take away my life, and a dead Mistress, or a dead Wife, would neither be conversable nor pleasurable, death is not amiable, it is rather a terror than a delight.
I will leave my Suit to your consideration, ponder on it well, and take good advice, my Suit is honest and just, a denial may inveterate my passion, and turn my pure love into a raging flame.
Why how now Son, shall I never find you with Company, but always alone, in a musing Melancholy posture?
I never did love much Company Sir.
But methinks in honesty, you might love the Company of your Wife.
Were my liberty equal to my Love, I should not be o•ten from her.
Why, who bars you from that liberty?
The Laws Sir.
So, I perceive you are discontented, because you are barred from your Whore.
You are my Father, but should another man have said so much, I would make him prove it with his blood.
Why, the Laws have proved it.
Oh Heavens, that Fathers should be so cruel! have not you made me unhappy, by forcing me to those actions that neither Conscience, Honesty, nor Honour can approve of; and yet will you disturb my Life, trouble my Thoughts, and torture me with words?
No, no, I love you so well, as I would have you so happy, as to be delighted with mirth, and not to bury your self in Melancholy, and despise those blessings Heaven bestows upon you, as Wealth and Honour, besides the blessing of Posterity; for your Lady proves to be fruitful, being big with Child.
I am so unhappy my self, I desire none but to please you.
Come, come, pray let me persuade you to go to your wife the Princess, and sit and talk with her, for she is displeased she hath no more of your Company, she complains and says she seldom sees you.
Her humour and mine are so different, that we are happiest when we are fardest asunder.
Let me tell you Son, that all women love to be flattered, and when they are not, they are peevish, cross, and froward, and therefore you must flatter her.
I must have a Tutor first to teach me Sir, for I under∣stand not the Art of flattery, I never practise it.
Time and Company, Ambition and Covetousness, will teach you that; but the best Tutor is Cupped, and the best Tutoress is Venus, and you have been a lover Son.
Yes Sir, in Hymens Court, and there they use not much flattery.
Not so much as in Venus, and Cupids Courts; but yet there are flatterers enough in Hymens, both Male and Females, but pray Son go to the Princess your wife.
Nurse, I hear the Arch-Prince is resolved to have me, if not by fair persuasions, by force.
And what woman would not be persuaded to be an Arch-Prin∣cess? they need no enforcement.
Not I, unless I could be persuaded to be an Arch-Whore, and if you went about to persuade me, you would be an Arch-Bawd.
Come, come, there is none durst call you so, is you were the Arch-Princesses, nor call me Bawd neither.
But they would think me so, and think you a Bawd.
Thoughts are free, and every one may think their pleasure, and therefore let me persuade you in spite of thoughts, to be an Arch-Princess.
If I thought you did not speak in jest, I should hate you in earnest.
What, for giving you good Counsel?
No, for giving me wicked Counsel: but I will give you better Counsel, and my self too.
What Counsel is that?
To forsake the World, and to go to Heaven.
Faith I would not go to Heaven, unless the Gods call me; I love this World very well, I have been long acquainted with it, and I would not willingly part from an old friend.
The World did never befriend any Body, besides thou art so old, as thy friend the World is run away from thee.
But howsoever, I will stay in it as long as I can.
Daughter I am come to persuade you not to reject a good fortune, for Fortunes favours are not proffered every day.
Nor are her favourites surer to continue in her fa∣four long.
But if I should command you to receive the Arch-Princes addresses, and to consent to be his wife, I hope you will not be less obedient to me than the Lord Melancholy hath been to his Father.
If he to obey his Father forgot, or neglected his obedi∣ence to Heaven, you must pardon me if I do not follow his precepts, not that I accuse him, for perchance his Conscience hath acquitted him, and set him
free, from fault, and so from blame, but mine doth not acquit me; where∣fore dear Mother, do not persuade me against my Conscience, I have had misfortunes enough to trouble my life, I shall not need to add the guilt of Conscience, and what can outward Title do me good? what pleasure can I take, when that my Mind, or Soul, is tortured with black guilt?
No, Heaven forbid I should persuade you against your Conscience; but how will you avoid, or escape the Princes in∣forcement?
I have thought of a way, that best suits with my Condi∣tion and Disposition, which is to take a Religious habit, and enter into a Religious Order; for though I cannot vow Virginity, nor a single life, ha∣avenge a Husband, and been used as a Wife, yet I can vow Chastity and re∣tirement; and if I could be permitted into an Nunnery, as perchance I can∣not, yet I would not go into any of them, for there is too much Company in ordinary Nunneries, and I love solitariness; wherefore I will live a kind of a Hermits life, only my Nurse and I; and that-little Tower my Father built for pleasure, shall be my Cloister, and before it is publicly known, I will send or go to the Fathers of the Church, and acquaint them, and strait Incloyster my self, and there I shall be safe; for the Prince dares not com∣mit Sacrilege, for Gods and men would rise against him if he did.
Nor I dare not oppose your holy design.
Dear Mother, speak not of it whilst I am in.
I shall not betray the trust of my Child.
Nan, have you saved the life of my Chair?
Yes Mistress, but I was forced to tell a lie for it.
God forgive thee Nan, for I do, and thank thee for my Chair; but my Father doth so chide me, as he makes me half a weary of my life, and swears I have got the Green-Sickness with sitting lasily on that Chair.
Truly Mistress I think you have a spice of it, for they that have the Green-Sickness have Odd-Humours; for I know one that had it, and the greatest pleasure she took in the World was to smell musty Bottels, and I knew another that took the like to smell old Shoes, and I knew another that would eat the Leather of old Shoes, and another that would eat Coals, and they would refuse the best meat that could be eaten, to eat such like things; and the strangeness is of that Disease, that every several person in that Disease, hath a several Odd-Humour or Appetite, to several tastes and smells, and they are never quiet, or pleased, but when they are eat∣ing, or smelling such meats, or scents, they think of nothing else.
Faith Nan, I doubt then I have a spice of that Disease, for when I am a broad, I long to be at home, to sit in my Chair.
Indeed all of that Disease, are like longing women with Child, and
they will be sick if they have not their longing, only those in the Green-Sickness, take more delight in extravagant Appetites, or Humours, than women with Child usually do.
Nay some Childing women are as extravagant, as those in the Green-Sickness: for some long to eat Tar, and the like meats; and I heard of one woman who coming from Market, wherein she had bought Butter, as she was going home she followed a man with a Bald head, and it did appear to her to be so smooth and flick, as she longed to clap on a pound of her Butter upon that Bald Crown, and was sick until she had done so, and then was well; and some Childing women long to give their Husbands boxes, or blows on the Ears, or Cheeks.
It is dangerous for Husbands to have their Childing wives apt to long, for fear they should long to make them Cuckolds.
Faith women will long to make their Husbands Cuckolds whether they are with Child or not.
But they dare not make known their longing, no more than you dare sit in your Chair, for fear your Father should discover it.
I will take such times as wives do to Cuckold their Husbands, as in their Husbands absence: so I will sit in my Chair when my Father is abroad, and you shall be the spy to watch his coming home, then give me warning or notice thereof.
So I shall be as the Bawd between the Chair and you.
Why Nan? a Bawd is one of the most thriving professions that is, and let me tell thee, that Pimping and Bawding is in such esteem and respect in this age, as great persons doe not scorn to be of that profession, nay they will bawd and pimp gratis rather than not be im∣ployed.
It seems then they take delight in the employment.
Oh yes, those that take delight in secrecy take de∣light in bawdery, the same delight Adulterours take; for it is not so much out of love to each others person, as to meet by stealth, and to have obscure entercourses, as to lay their designs subtly, to make excuses readily, to meet privately; for all the pleasure is in lying, designing, and abusing, and if it were not for the delight to deeds of darkness, there would not be an Adult∣rye committed in any Age; but every one takes delight to act the part of a Mountebank, or Juggler, to cousin, deceive, or delude.
But some take delight to act the Fool.
Oh that's a natural part to most of the World, they need no art to reach them• but come Nan, lets go see if my Father be gone abroad.
But if your Father be abroad, your Mother will be at home.
She will be no hinderance, for my Mother will wink at my Extravagant follies, and my Childish humours.
I wonder the Messenger is not returned from the Lady Perfection.
I hope your Highness doth not intend to marry her?
Why not? she is a virtuous Lady.
She is but my Sons leavings.
Virtue cannot be sullied.
But Sir, pray consider the advantages that you will lose by refusing the Emperors Daughter; besides, the Emperor will take it as an affront, and will endeavour to revenge it with Fire and Sword, for certainly he will make a war with you.
Why, if he should, I make no question but I shall be able to encounter him, at least to resist him.
But now Sir you live in a happy peace, wherein all your Sub∣jests grow rich, and your Kingdom flourishes with plenty, and your Highness lives in pleasure and magnificence, all which a War may bring to ruin; there is nothing got by VVars Sir, the venturers are losers; wherefore good Sir consider what danger, at least trouble, you will bring upon your self by this Marriage.
How comes it you staid so long?
I could no see the Lady.
Would no she be seen?
No Sir, but after a long stay the Lady her Mother came to me, to receive your Highnesses Letter, and the Message your Highness sent by me, which when I had delivered, she bid me present her humble duty to your Highness, and to pray you to put her Daughter out of your thoughts, at least not to think of her for a Wife, for she had taken a Religious Habit, and had put her self into a Religious Order, wherein she would pray for your Highness as long as she lived.
Oh Fool that I was, that I did not prevent it.
Your Highness did not know she would enter into a Religi∣os Habit and Order.
But I might have mistrusted it by her refusal, but I will en∣devour to get her out; perchance she hath not made her Vows yet.
And is she entered into a Religious Order? I am glad of it, for it will be some ease, and rest unto my restless Soul, that she is safe and well secured.
My Lord, the Princess desires your Company, for she hath grumb∣ling pains as if she would fall in labour.
Have you seen the new Devote yet?
Yes, with much ado: for she will not be seen, unless to some particular persons, or near friends.
And how doth she become her Religious Habit?
So handsomely, as she is far handsomer in her Peas habit, than when she was dressed with all the Arts of Vanities.
What manner of Habit is it?
Somewhat like the Normetanes, but much more becoming.
Well, I will go to the Lady her Mother, and entreat her to let me go with her to see her Daughter.
It is said that now the Lady Perfection is incloistered, that the Treaty goes on betwixt the Arch-Prince and the Emperor.
What's the matter you run so hastily?
I am running to give the Arch-Prince notice, that his Niece is in labour, and is so ill she is like to die.
We will not stay you shen.
It's said the Lady Perfection hath entered into a Religious Order, she is happy, would I were so.
It is a question whether you would think your self so, if you were as she is.
I think the happiest life is to be a Devote.
Faith Mistress you wish to be a Devote, not so much out of a devo∣tion, as for a change in life, as many wish to be married out of a desire to alter their course of life, and when they are married, they wish to be unmoor∣ried again, so would you do if you were a Devote.
Oh no: for though those that are married wish to be unmarried, by reason Marriage is the most troublesome, unquiet life that is, but a Devotes life is the most peaceable and quiet life that is; so as there is as much difference in the course of a Married life and an Incloy∣stered life, as between Heaven and Hell.
Then the most part of the World prefers Hell before Heaven, for more are Married than are Incloistered.
Truly by the course of the World, and the action of men, one would think there would be more Devils in Hell than Saints in Heaven.
You hear the news of the Princess delivery, and her Death.
Yes I heard she died as soon as delivered, but she hath left a Son and Heir to her sorrowful Husband.
I do not believe her Husband is much troubled or grieved for her Death, as his Father is.
Indeed I think the young Lord had no great affections for her.
No surely, for he loves the Lady he was first married to so well, as he could spare no love for any other woman•
If that Lady had not entered into a Religious Order, he might have remarried her, but now he cannot.
I believe that if the other Lady had known the Princess should have died so soon, she would not have been so Religious as to have Incloistered her self from the World, and to ha'bard up her liberty with Vows.
It is like when she hears of the Princesses Death she will repent the acts of devotion.
Then Repentance is not always for acts of evil, but sometimes of good.
There is Repentance of all sorts and degrees, and there are more enter into Religious Orders out of Discontent, than for Love to God.
That is an uncharitable opinion.
Nay it is not a bare Opinion, that may be proved, nor uncharitable to speak the truth.
Oh Nan I am undone for ever.
As how Mistress?
Why by your neglect and carelessness; for your not watching my Fathers coming home, to give me notice, my Father hath found my Chair: for I hearing him come, run to hide away my Chair, he coming and seeing me scuttle about the room, imagined I desired to hide something from him, for which he searches all my Chamber over, at last he went and looked into the Cole-hole where I had flung my Chair, and finding it, he car∣ried it away in one hand, and led me along in the other hand, and causing a fire to be made of the Chair, made me stand by to see the Martyrdom, whereat I was so afflicted, as I lost my fight in tears, which tears I let run on the fire, hoping to quench it out, but they were so brent with grief, as they did rather augment the fury of the fire, than abate the rage of the flame; so that which I thought would have been a preserver did hasten the destruction.
Faith Mistress it is none of my fault, for your Mother sent me of an errand, and whilst I was absent by your Mothers commands, it seemed your Father came home.
This is an excuse.
You may believe it it is no excuse, but truth; for I that ventured the loss of my Soul by telling a lie to save your Chair, would not neglect the watch, had not I been commanded away.
I am of an opinion you were bribed to betray the life of my Chair, and bribes are so powerful as they corrupt promises and vows, even the Soul its self; though the Soul makes no use of bribes, yet it will venture to be damned for a bribes sake.
Well Mistress, since a mistrust is all my reward, you shall tell the next lie your self.
No prithee Nan let us be friends, for I shall never get a Servant that will so readily tell lies for me as you do; wherefore let us shake hands and be friends.
Well Mistress, let me tell you, that my hand and tongue is at your service, the one to work, the other to lie for your service.
I thank you Nan, for many Servants will lie, but few will work.
The Lord Melancholy hath such a sober, sad Countenance, as I never saw any young man have the like.
Indeed I never saw him smile in my life.
I asked a Gentleman that waits on him, whether his Lord did ever smile, he said he never saw him smile since he parted from his first Lady.
Then he hath not smiled this nine years, for so long it is since he parted from his first Lady.
If the siege last one year more, it will be as long a siege as the siege of Troy.
Indeed the causes of either siege resembles each other, as both for the love of fair Ladies; I know not whether the effect will prove alike, as whether it will be the destruction of his heart, as the siege of Troy wa• the destruction of Troy.
But the Lord Melancholy is rather like Helen than Menelaus, for he hath had two wives, and the Lady Perfection is as Menelaus, for her Hus∣band is taken away from her, as his wife was from him; but leaving this siege let us return to our own homes.
Madam, yesterday when you were pleased to speak with me, as now through this Grate, you were pleased to tell me your Vows were so binding as they could not be dissolved; wherefore I am not now come to examine, or persuade, nor to trouble your Devotions, or to hinder your Meditations, but to take my last leave, for I shall never see you more, at least not in this World.
Are you going to Travel?
I cannot say my body is going a far Journey, I know not what my Soul may do.
Shall not they go together?
No, Death will make a divorce, as the Law did be∣twixt you and I.
Are you resolved to dye?
Yes.
Why so?
To be at rest and peace: for know, that ever since I was last married, my life hath been a Hell, my Mind was tortured with thoughts of discontent, and though I am releast from what I did dislike, my mind is restless still for what it would enjoy; this resolution is not new, it hath been long considered; for since I cannot live with that I love better than life, isle try whether the passions of the Soul doe with the Body dye, if so, Death will be happy, because it hath no sense nor feeling.
How long have you been resolved of leaving life?
I have pondered of it ever since I was last Married, but was not resolved until you entered into this Order.
Can I not persuade you to live?
Not unless you break your Vow.
That I may not do.
Nor can I persuade you, for I love your Constancy.
Will you grant me one request before you die?
Yes, any thing but what may hinder my dying.
Swear to me you will.
I swear by Heaven and Love I will.
Then the time you are resolved to dye, come hither and dye here, that I may bear you Company, dying the same minute if I can that you do.
How?
Nay, you have sworn it, and if it be best for you, it will be so for me; for when you are dead I shall possess those torments that you in life feel now, and if you love me so well as you express you do, you will not desire to leave me to endure that you cannot suffer.
It is fit you should live to be a President to the World.
Were I a President fit for the World to follow, yet the World would not practice my precepts, it is too bad to follow what is good, and since my life cannot better the World, and Death will ease my life of that which will trouble and afflict it, I am resolved to dye. And in the grave will bear you Company.
I do accept of thy dear Company, &amp; Heaven so join our Souls they never may be separated, and to morrow we will leave the World.
Let me advise you concerning the manner of our Deaths, get a Sword pointed sharp at both ends, and when we are to dye put one end of the Sword through this grate, and just when you set your heart to the end towards you, I will set mine to the end towards me, and thrusting forward as to meet each other, the several points will make several passages or wounds into our several or rather our own united hearts, and so we dye just together.
I shall follow your advice, and be here to morrow at the time.
Which time will seem to me like as an Age,
Till that our Souls be fled forth from their Cage.
My Soul will fly your Soul to embrace,
And after Death may hope a resting place.
You here the match is concluded betwixt the Emperors Daughter and our Prince.
Yes, and I hear that the Lord Dorato was a great Instrument to help the match forward.
Methinks they should need no other Instrument to forward the match than the Princes interest.
It is true: but the Princes affection being placed upon another Lady, it was hard first to draw off those affections, and then to place them anew; besides, the Death of his Niece was some hinderance.
All great Princes doe soon cast off all Funeral sadness: but the Lord Dorato methinks takes the Death of his Daughter to heart.
It is a doubt whether he will continue in such great favour with the Prince, now his Niece is dead.
There is no likelihood he should be in less favour since the Prin∣cess Death, for it was the favour he had with the Princess that caused the match with his Son; besides he hath left a Son, which the Prince no doubt will favour the Grandfather the more, for the Childes sake.
I wonder whether the Lord Melancholy the Princesses Husband will marry again, for he had ill fortune with his Wives.
Methinks he hath had good Fortune, for the Laws have quited him of one, and Death of the other; but that Husband hath ill fortune, that neither Law nor Death will free him from.
Sweet, here is that will quit us of all trouble.
Indeed life is a trouble, and nothing is at rest but what lies in the grave.
Are you not afraid of the sight of a murdering Sword?
No more than you are afraid of the sight of the glo∣rios Sun.
You seem to have a courage above you Sex.
My love is above Life, as far as my Courage is beyond Fear; I neither fear Death, nor consider Life, but can embrace the one, and fling away the other for Loves sake.
Then dear Wife, for so you are, my heart did never own another, I wish our breaths and bloods might intermix together, and as Deaths Ceremonies might join our Souls.
They are joined already by love, and Death's sufficient to bring them both together, and our bloods it is like will run in trickling streams upon this Sword, to meet and intermix.
These Buttons are like troublesome guests at Marriage Nuptials, but are you ready Wife for our second Marriage?
I am now ready to go into the Bed of Earth.
Hold, and stain not this sacred places with murde∣rears blood. Lady, is this the Devotion profess, wickedly to murder your self?
Father, know I accounted self Death no wickedness, and I will venture on my own belief.
But the Church hath power to absolve you now, if you desire personly to meet.
Yes, such power as the Laws had to dissolve our Marri∣age; but the Churches absolving can no more acquit my Conscience from my Devoted Vow, than the Laws could from my Marriage Vow.
Pray give us leave to plead.
Take it.
You have vowed Chastity, and a retired Incloy∣stered life.
I have so.
Why, then marry this Lord again, and let him make the same Vow, and enter into the same Cloister, and into the same Religi∣os Order of Chastity, and being Man and Wife you are but as one person, so that if you be constant and true to your selves, you keep the Vow of Cha∣steady; for what is more Chaste than lawful Marriage, and Virtuous Man and Wife?
Husband, are you willing to make the Vow of Chastity, and to live an Incloistered life?
I am all will to that Vow and life, for so I shall enjoy thy Soul and Body; and good Father re-marry us, and then I will thank you for Life and Wife.
First you shall make your Vow, then take a Religious Habit, and then be re-married, and go along with us and we will order you fixed for to enter into this Religious Order of Chastity, and if you be both happy in life, as sure you will, thank your Nurse, who hearing your cruel, and as I may say irreligious design, informed us, and placing us within a Loby, we heard you, and saw you, though you knew not that we did so, for you had barred the outward Door, but being within we were ready to come forth and hinder you as we did.
Well Father, since you have hindered our Deaths, pray make me sit to enjoy Life; my Heaven of Life, or Life of Heaven.
Come then.
Why do you weep Mistress?
Because my Father will have me marry.
Many young Maids weep because they cannot get Husbands, but few weep to enjoy one.
I do not cry because I shall have a Husband, but because I shall have a Foot to my Husband.
There are few wise Husbands, and fewer wise Men.
What difference is betwixt a wise Husband, and a wise Man.
Why a wise Husband is to rule and govern his Wife, well, but a wise Man is to rule and govern himself, well, and there is more that can tell how to rule and govern others than themselves, like as there may be good Kings and not good Men, and good Men and not good Kings, or as there may be good Teachers as Preachers, and not good practisers; so this Gentleman you are to marry may be a wise Husband, although not a wise Man.
But he will be both a foolish Husband, and a fool∣each Man.
If he prove a foolish Husband you have no reason to cry, for then you will have the more Liberty.
The more liberty to be a Fool you mean.
Indeed liberty to women makes them rather foolish than wise: for women know not how to use liberty discreetly, for when they have liberty they run beyond the bounds of discretion.
Faith if I marry this same Gentleman that my Father says I shall, I shall run beyond the bounds of Matrimony.
That is to run into your Neighbours Bed.
Do you hear of the new Religious Order?
What new Religious Order?
Why the Order of Chastity in marriage.
That's a new Order indeed, never heard of before, at least not practised; but this Order, if it continue, will make marriage as Religi∣os in life as the marriage of Saints.
Why the marriage of men and women is a type of the marriage of Saints.
But the type often commits Adultery, and for my part I would not be one of that Religious Order.
No, for on my Conscience I believe you would disorder the Order.
But who hath brought up this foolish new Order?
The Lord Melancholy and the Lady Perfection, who are re-marri∣ed, and have both vowed Chastity in marriage, and an Incloistered life, and have taken a Religious Habit.
The more unwise they, that will bind themselves so strictly.
So honestly.
I hate honesty that way, or that way of honesty.
You hate that way of honesty, because you love the ways of Adultery.
I come not to complain, nor reprove your Chaste wife for denying my Suit, nor am I come only to give you joy of your new mar∣riage, but your new Religious Order of Chastity in marriage, which Order, I believe that few besides your self will enter into.
Then few will be so happy Sir as we are.
Indeed happiness lives more in Cloisters than in Courts, or Cities, or private families; but my Lord Dorato your Father here will want the comfort of your Company, which should be a Partner with him in the Rule and Government of his Family and Fortunes.
I have left him a Grand-Son Sir to be a comfort to him in my absence, and I wish he may prove as obedient to him as I have done.
Faith Son the first time of your marriage, was without my knowledge or consent, but howsoever now I wish you joy, and for your sake I will never cross Matrimonial Love whilst I live, and I hope God will bless you both, so as that you may beget a Religious Generation.
All the Children they beget and bring up must be of the Re∣ligious Orders.
If they will follow their Parents purities and precepts they will.
There may proceed from these two a great Generation, which may spread all over the World, and be famous for Piety and Acts of Devotion.
I hope your Highnesses words are Prophecies of what is to come.
I wish they prove so; farewell, all happiness dwell with you both.
Long may your Highness live and flourish.
My blessing on you both.

My Dear Gadder.
My sweet Kindeling.
Faith Ladies Nature never made women to kiss each other, and therefore it is unnatural, and being unnatural it is unlawful, and being unlawful it ought to be forbidden.
Yes, you would have us kiss you men.
No Ladies, we men will kiss you women, if you please to give us leave.
You will take leave sometimes.
It is when we think we shall not be refused, or at least not to be disfavoured for it.
What, kissing again? faith Ladies you will make us believe by your often kissing, that you desire we should kiss you, and with that belief we may run into an error, if it be an error to kiss a fair Lady.
Fie, fie, you men are odd Creatures.
No, you women are odd Creatures, when you are not with us men.
Preethy Gadder and Bridlehead let us go do something to pass away our time.
What shall we do?
Let us go to Cards.
Faith I have made a Vow not to play for money.
We will play for Sweet-meats.
No, preethy let us play for a Sack Posit.
O no, we will play for Sweet-meats.
I say a Sack Posit.
Let the most voices carry it.
I will speak for the men, we say a Sack Posit, for that will make us both good Company in the eating the Posit, and after it is eaten, whereas Sweet-meats will make us heavy and dull.
Well then let us go play for a Sack Posit.
Faith a Sack Posit will make me drunk.
You will be the better Company Lady.
Fie Bridlehead, you should not say drunk, but your head giddy.
That is better than to be drunk: for a giddy head hath a light heel.
The Lord Poverty is a gallant Noble person.
They are gallant and Noble that are Rich, and titled Honour without Means, is like a Body without a Soul.
You are mistaken friend, it is rather a Soul without a Body.
Alas titled Honour without Means to maintain it, is despised.
If the person hath Merit worthy of his titled Honour, that titled Honour is worthy to be respected and bowed to by all inferior persons; nay put the case that Honourable titles are placed upon Unworthy persons, yet all ought to give respect to those Titles, and to do homage thereunto, though not unto the Person, yet because it comes from a lawful and Supreme pow∣er; as Natural rays of light do from the Sun; and those that strive through envy and through spite, for to Eclipse the light, deserve to be in a perpetual darkness; so those that do detract from titled Honours, ought never to be honoured with Titles or respect.
Why, it is not only I that have no such titles of Honour that speaks against them, but those that do possess them, and their fore-fathers long before them.
They that do so ought to be degraded, as being unworthy to wear the badge or mark of their fore-fathers Merits, or heroic Acts, for they do show they have none of their own; but those that get their own Ho∣nurse, by their own Merits and worthy Actions, deserve them best; for they, like as a clear and glorious day, appear; for oft-times their posterity, like Clouds begot from gross and drowsy Earth, strive to quench out their Fathers flaming Honours, and by their Baseness obscure the light of their fore-fathers great and glorious Fame, and in the end bury themselves in dark Oblivion, as vanishing to nothing, as being never mentioned nor remembered; but those that for their loyalty and their fidelity unto their King and Coun∣try, have hazarded lives, and lost their liberties and Estates, and are grown poor for Honesties sake, and Virtuous causes, yet they in after Ages will live with great renown; for it is not in the power of spite to pull them down; for the Gods give Fame to Noble Actions, as Kings give titled Honours; though men that are base will not relieve them, yet Fame will remember them; and though base men will rail against them, yet Fame will praise them; and though they dye with Poverty, and should end their lives in a foul
Ditch, yet shall that Ditch be honoured by their Death, more than the rich unworthy man be honoured by his stately Tombs and costly Funerals.
What's the matter with you to day Lady Solitary? you look as if you were in a married humour.
Why Lady Examination, what humour is a married humour?
Why a mass of ill humours mixed or put together; as a lumpish, dumpish, dull, stupid humour; or a peevish, fretting, pining, whi∣ning humour; or a brawling, yowling, quarrelling, scolding humour; or a jealous, suspicious humour; or a fawning, feigning, dissembling humour.
If these humours are woven into the marriage knot, I will never marry, for I would be loath to have the peace of my life strangled in discon∣tent: for whosoever be subject to these humours can never be happy.
You will change your mind, and rather live with these hue∣morse than without a Husband; but I am come now to fetch you abroad, for their is a Company of sociable Ladies and gallants, that have made a meeting some league of, where there will be Mirth, Jollity, Plenty and Pleasure, and they desire you will be sociable for once, and go along with them.
Would you have the Body which is the habitation of the Mind a wanderer, travelling from place to place, disturbing the mind with un∣profitable journeys?
No, I would have it remove so as it may always situate it self in a wholesome, profitable, plentiful, pleasant, and pleasurable place.
I perceive you prefer the pleasures of the Body before the de∣light of the Mind.
Why the mind can take no delight without the body; for the body gives the mind a being and habitation: for there would be no mind if there were no body, but if there could be a mind without a body, yet the mind could receive no delight without the pleasure of the body, for the pleasure of the body is the delight of the mind, and not the delight of the mind the pleasure of the body, for the mind doth never give nor return; wherefore come away, and leave your Solitary musing to those whose con∣dition of fortune denies them the use of the World, and worldly pleasures, and do not deny your self, for I hate a self-denying Creature.
Well, you shall prevail with me for this one time.
Have you seen Monsieur Thesis Book of Poems that is newly come forth?
Yes.
And how do you approve of them?
As well as I do of an Anagram.
There is never an Anagram in the Book.
Why the whole Book is an Anagram of Doctor Costives Poems: for he hath only new placed the words, as they do Anagrams of names, but the whole matter, sense, and conceits is the same.
Indeed he hath imitated him.
By your favour, imitation is only to be like another, and not the same; but his is the very same, as I have told you, for which he deserves less praises than a Imitator, although those that do imitate any Excellent Poet, do not gain so much honour to themselves, as they give honour to those they imitate; as for example, the Imitators of Homer give more honour to Homer than to themselves; for Imitators are only as Painters, where he that is imita∣ted is as Nature, or the Gods, for the one draws but Copies, the other makes the Original; so that there is as much difference as a Man, and the Picture of a man.
But a Painter that draws the Picture of a man, very like the life, he may be more famous than the man that is drawn.
But not worshipped and adored, as Nature is, that made him: for Art cannot out-do Nature, nor do as Nature hath dove, and doth do; and an Imitator is but an Artificer, when as the Original Author is a Creator, and ought to be accounted of, and respected, and worshipped as Divine; but there are or have been but very few Poets that have such powers and parts to make a perfect Creature, which is a perfect work, as Poems, scenes, or story; but some Poets are like Chemist, that strive and labour to make as Na∣ture makes, but most fail in their work, and lose their labours, wanting that Natural heat, or well-tempered matter, which should produce such Cry∣tures as Nature makes, yet some it is said have made gold, as Raimond Lully.
Then Homer is a Raimond Lully in Poetry.
Nay rather Raimond Lully is a Homer in Chemistry: for no man ought to compare Homer to any Creature, by reason he hath out-wrought Nature, having done that which she never did; for Nature never made Gods, Devils, Hells, and Heavens, as Homer hath done.
For my part I had rather be Raimond Lully than Homer: for I had rather have the Art to make Gold, than the Nature to make Poems.
You would not gain so much by Gold as Wit.
Why, what shall I gain?
Fame.
But Gold will bribe Fame to speak as I would have her, if I have •old enough to bribe her.
But Poems will force Fame to speak for you without a bribe.
That were all one to me, so she speaks well, whether she be for∣••d, flattered, or bribed.
But there is a fate of Poverty on Chemists, as much as on Poets, so that if you were as Excellent a Chemist as Raimond Lully, you would be as poor as Divine Homer.
Not if I could make Gold.
Yes, for Chemists spend more in the making of Gold, than they gain by it when it is made; and how should they do otherways, when they must needs spend a pound or pounds to make a grain? for the limbeck of a Chemist is but a little Still set a-work by a wasting fire, whereas Natures limbeck is the Earth, set a-work by an undecaiable fire, which is the Sun; this Chemist becomes as poor by an over-greedy Covetousness, as Poets by a despising Carelessness.
Then Chemists are like those Bodies which become lean with over-eating, and Poets like those Bodies that becomes lean by over-fasting; the one surfeits, the other famishes.
Indeed Chemists are so greedily Covetous, and feed so much on hopes, as they never leave until such time as they have vomited out all their wealth, and then they become sick and lean with Poverty.
The Lady Faction is of a strange busy Nature, she runs into eve∣rye House, takes upon her to govern every ones Family, yet cannot rule her own; she condemns all Actions, be they never so Just or Prudent; all Officers, be they never so worthy, or fitly placed; all Laws, be they never so beneficial, or expedient for the Common-wealth; all Customs, be they never so ancient or harmless, indeed all peaceable, wise, and well or∣dered Governments: she hates and delights in nothing but disordered change.
It is said she is in love with Sir William Admirer.
And he in love with the Lady Peaceable.
She is a sweet Lady.
I will sit and listen to what you say, and learn from you what is the noblest way to entertain the life.
Alas I cannot learn you, I have not long experience, my Soul is
young, a mere novice Soul, it wants both growth and experienced years, for I am like a House that is newly built and is unfurnished.
Though you are young, you are wise.
How can you expect youth can be discreet and wise, when those that have lived long, and have had much experience, are oftentimes Fools? wherefore I can only entertain you like a Parrot, only with words, not wisely to discourse, and if you should listen to me long, I shall surfeit your Ears with idle words, for the Brain will be as soon over-charged with noise, as the Stomach with meat.
I can no more be weary of thy words, than Angels are with Heavenly Music.
Lady Peaceable, the report is you are Ambitious to get away my Servant Sir William Admirer from me.
I am only Ambitious to live Virtuously, and dye Piously.
Why Servant, I hear you have forsaken me.
I despaired of ever being entertained, and so I never really ad∣dressed a Suit, but by way of raillery.
Your Mistress doth not believe you, for she blushes either for your faults, or her own.
My Bashfulness proceeds not from a Guiltiness, either of base actions, wicked thoughts, mean birth, or breeding, or evil or erroneous open∣nions; for my bashfulness is only an effect of Nature: for as some are natu∣rally fearful, so am I naturally bashful; and as Melancholy produces a sad Countenance, so Bashfulness produces an extorted and a Convulsive Coun∣tenance; as Grief produces tears, so Bashfulness produces blushing.
Lady Faction, spare my young Mistress, lest she should out-run you in a full speed.
Your Mistress is too grave, and speaks too scholastical for a wo∣man, she seems as if she had been bred in an University, which breeding is fitter for a man.
No surely, for men should be bred with Heroic Actions, wo∣men with Modest Contemplations, as I have been.
If you have talked so seldom, and have learned so little, how come you to know so much?
My knowledge is not copious, yet I have learned as much as
my years could embrace, and my desire is to know as much as Modesty will
allow of, Honour will give leave to, Capacity can comprehend, or Life can
reach at; but the longest life is but a short time to gather knowledge in;
but Madam, I should think I had learned well, if I knew how to do you service.
Let me tell you, it is Craft and Subtlety that you practice, to catch fond, facile Fools under the veil of Civility, but not good Nature; for you, like a Sorceress as you are, Enchant and Bewitch all that come near you, with this dissembling, for which you ought to be banished from all noble Company.
Take heed Lady of sharp-headed Curses, that Shoot through innocent Lips, they seldom miss the mark they aim at.
Shoot as many as you will, I fear them not.
My dear sweet, wife, Virtuous Mistress, be not angry, for all the World knows the Lady Faction is a disturber of all good and peaceable Society.
No, I am not angry with her, but I will watch her, lest she should do me some harm.
Prithee what art thou writing?
I am writing Fancies.
Prithee what are Fancies?
Why, Fancies are minzed Objects, pounded and chopped by Ima∣gination, which Imaginations are the several Cooks which serve the Mind, and as skilful Cooks of several meats make Becks or Olioes, so doth the Imagination of several Objects; and as skilful Cooks will mix several meats, so as not any one particular shall be tasted, so doth the Imagination of several Objects or Subjects.
But some say Fancies are Created by Motion in the Brain, which would be there were there no such materials as Objects or Subjects, which the Senses as Caterers bring in.
The Brain can no more Create Fancy without the materials of outward Objects, and Subjects, than Nature can Create a World without matter to make it withal; so the Brain can no more Create Fancy without the help of the Senses, than Nature can Create a Creator without the help of Motion; for though Fancies are the works of the Brain, yet the Brain could not work unless it had something to work on; but Objects and Sub∣jests of Objects, may be divided in the Brain so small, or beaten so thin, as the first form may be beaten out, and when the first form is gone, we deny the matter, like as if we should deny that Paper is made with Rags, because the form of Rags is beaten out; thus by the subtle and curious motion of proud Conception joined with the dazzled memory, we deny the Senses a share, as not being Partners therein, or labours thereof, the same way we conceive the Gods, for the Conceptions of the Gods is but minzed Ima∣ginations.
Lady Censurer, pray what think you of the Lady Retorts wit, hath not she a great wit?
Oh fie, she hath a Chamber-Maids wit.
What wit is that Lady?
Why a snip snaply wit.
Indeed I have heard many Nursery Maids give so sharp and quick replies, as amongst some would be judged to be great wits, yet come to discourse seriously with them, and they were not much wiser than Beasts; but what do you think of the Lady Sharps wit?
Her wit fetches the skin off of the Ears, it corrodes the minds of the hearers, more than Vinegar the tongues of the tasters.
How approve you of the Lady Courtlyes wit?
Her wit is tedious, as all Complementing wits are, they tire the Ears of the hearers.
What say you to the Lady Stronglines wit?
Her wit is costive, and is delivered with labour, difficulty, and pain.
What think you of the Lady Learnings wit?
Her wit is an Alms Tub, it yields nothing but scraps, frog∣mints, and broken pieces.
What think you of the Lady Subtilties wit?
Her wit is Lime, Twigs, Snares and Traps to catch Fools in or with.
How like you the Lady Fancies wit?
Her wit indeed is a true Natural wit, it it is sweet and delight∣full, easy and pleasing, as being free and unconstrained.
How like you the Lady Contemplations wit?
Her wit is wise, and distinguishing well: for all Comtemplative persons judge, weigh, and measure out the right and truth of every thing, and find out the easiest and profitablest ways, by the help of consideration; yet Contemplative persons when they come into Company, or public So∣cieties, their tongues do as Boys, that having been kept hard to their studies, when once they get a play day, they run wildly about, and many times do extravagant actions: so Contemplative persons when they are in Company their tongues speak extravagant words, and their behaviour for the most part is unnatural to their dispositions; but of all wits the Contempla∣tive wit is the best, by reason it is a near Neighbour to Poetry.
Come friend Kindeling, and friend Bridlehead, let us go to the Lady Censurers; for there is the resort of all the gallants at her House.
What should we do there? for all the men will hearken so much to her discourse, as they will take no notice of us.
Why then we will take notice of them: for if we should stay at home, and not seek out the Company of men, faith we shall never get us Husbands.
It is easy to get the Company of men, not so easy to get Hus∣bands: for we have a great many men that come often to visit us, but none offer to marry us.
But the more acquaintance we have, the more likely we should get Husbands; for it were a hard: Fortune, if amongst so many men we should not get one Husband.
Why one Husband will not serve us three.
I mean each of us one.
Well then let us go.
Oh thou Clod of Earth, sit not idle here, but go abroad and receive the comfort of the Sun, which works to all effects.
I need not, for my Mind is as the Sun it self, and hath the same of∣fects; for my Mind doth contract, attract, dilates, and expulses, for sometimes it dilates it self as the Sun doth, in beams of light, which is Inventions, at other times the Mind dilates, as the Sun his hear, which is in Poetic flames, and in rarefied fancies; likewise the Mind attracts, as the Sun doth Vapours from the Earth, so my Mind attracts knowledge from the World, as from se∣viral subjects and objects, as the Sun from several Climates; likewise as the Sun contracts porous matter into a solid sustance, so doth my Mind contract loose thoughts into solid Judgment; and as the Sun expulses united Bodies into parts, so doth my Mind expulse its serious Contemplations, and united Con∣captions into several discourses.
Prithee expulse this discourse amongst thy sociable friends.
What amongst the sociable Virgins?
Nay faith, Wives for the most part are more sociable than Maids.
Sir, I hear you intend to be a Soldier in the Wars.
Yes Madam, I am come to take my leave, and to kiss your Ladyships hands before I go.
Sir you have chosen an honourable Profession, for though it is an industrious, careful, painful, and dangerous Profession, yet it is a noble Protection to the Weak and Infirm, to the decrepit Age, and shiftless Youth; to the faint and tender Female Sex; it is a guard to the ashes of the Dead, and to the Temples of the Gods; for without Marshal Discipline no Peace would be kept, Truth and Right would be torn from the owners, Ju∣stice pulled out from her Seat, and Monarchy quite from his Throne, and though a Soldier may lose his life sooner than Nature did determine, yet in recompense, Honour buries him, and Fame builds up his Monument.
Your descriptions Madam are able to make a Coward a Vali∣ant Man.
Some have thought the World was but as Stage, and that the several Creatures are the several Actors, and that every several Gene∣ration is a new Play.
No every several Generation doth not seem as if they were new Plays; for there seems to be but one play, and that to continue to the end of the World, and that every Generation seems only new Actors, that play over the same parts, for we well perceive that the following Generations act but what the former Generations did before them; it is true the World seems to be the Stage, and the Seas, Rocks, Rivers, Plants, Hills, Dales, Ci∣ties, Towns, Villages, and the like, are as the several Changes, the Animals as the several Actors, the several Seasons the several Scenes, and the Specta∣tors are the Gods, and the end of the World the end of the Play, and then they must make another World, if they will have another Play.
Surely Mercury is their Poet.
It is very likely, also it is probable Pallas helps him.
Nay it is probable that Venus and Cupped helps him, for Love and Beauty doth at all times assist a Poet.
There is no excellent and extraordinary wit, but hath many as∣sistants,
as first Nature is the chief; so likewise Mercury, Pallas, Venus, Cupped, and the Muses.
The most foolish Actors of all Actors, are women.
The truth is, it it is very unhappy for women, that they are not instructed in the rules Rhetoric, by reason they talk so much, that they might talk sensibly, whereas now for want of that Art, they talk mere nonsense.
But all women are apt to speak more than to Act, by reason words are easily spoke, and deeds so hard to be done.
Faith women are as full of Actions as words; for all their life is employed with talking and running about to no purpose.
Come let, us go abroad, for I love to refresh my self in the Serene Air, taking the pleasure of every Season, as when the returning Sun sp•ns Golden Beams, which interwaves into the thiner Air, as Golden Threads with softer Silk, making it like a Mantle, Rich and warm, which wraps the Body of each Creature in; so in the Summer when lifferous winds do fan the sultry heat; then in the Autum that's like a temperate Bath, which is neither too hot nor too cold; then in the Winter, when free∣sing cold doth purge the Air, as Physic doth the Body from most corrupt humours, and binds each loose deshevered part.
The Winter will bind up your active limbs, and numb your flesh, and make your Spirits chill, besides Winter doth bedrid Nature, the spiteful malicious and wicked Season, for it doth strive for to destroy each several thing, and it yields nothing good it self; besides it doth Imprison many things, binding them fast with Icy Chains, taking away their Natural Liberty, also it doth not only frown, and lore on the bright Sun, making his light dim and dusky, but Winter doth untwist, and doth unweave the Suns bright Golden Beams, and wind them on dark bottoms.
The cold sharp Air is as sharp unto the touch, as a Lemon to the taste, and works alike in some effects.
Yes be'r Lady in causing frowning, and crumpling faces.
Not only so, but sharp Air, and sharp Lemons, do both cleanse from Putrification, and keep from Corruption.
But hot Air works upon the Body, as strong Liquors upon the Brain, for hot Air distempers the Body, as strong Liquors do the Mind.
Beshrow me, I have felt some Airs as hot, and as burning, as Brandy-wine.
What Wine is that?
The Wine of Wine, the Spirits of Wine.
Indeed that Wine, if you call it so, which is Strong-waters, will work upon the Body as soon as the hottest Air, causing Feavours and other Malignant diseases.
It seems that hot and burning Air, works upon the Spirits as much and as soon as the hottest Liquors, and hot Liquors upon the By∣die as much as hot Air, both causing Feavours and Frenzies.
In truth, and I heard that Air is liquid, and so is Drink, and Drunkards, like frantic persons, will do mad tricks sometimes.
And there are several sorts of Air, as there are several sorts of Drinks, some colder, some hotter, some moist, and some hath dry effects, and some Air refreshes and quenches heat, other some dissipates and ex∣pels cold, some revives the Spirits, and some enrages them, some corrupts Bodies, and some preserves them.
By my Faith, I perceive Air and Drink have many good and bad qualities, but I had rather have good Drink and bad Air, than bad Drink and good Air, there is some substance in the one, but the other is like unto that which I have heard of but could never see, which is Incorporality; for that which is not subject to my sight, I can hardly believe it is any thing.
Indeed very thin Air is next unto nothing.
Tom. Adventurer is gone to be a Soldier.
Yes, and he may chance to get a glorious Fame.
But particular Fems are like particular Creatures, some dye and decay sooner than others, but few live to old Nestors years, and some lye Bedrid, and a great Company are decrepit and lame, others are crooked and deformed from their Birth, and some by evil Fortune; and many are Or∣phans, and abundance Bastards and Changelings; and though War makes the loudest noise in Fems Palace, yet Wit for the most part lives the long∣est therein; for Wit is such a delightful Company, and such pleasant pa∣stem, as old Father Time takes great care to preserve it, lapping Wit warm in the Memory, and feeding it often with Rehearsals.
Come, Come, you will never get you a real Lover, if you delight so much in Solitaries.
I desire none: for real Lovers do oftentimes prove inconstant,
whereas feigned lovers are as constant as the Contemplator would have them, and as many as they would have; besides, a crowd or multitude of thoughts may rise up in the brain, and be as Spectators of one single thought, which if the Contemplator pleases may be a Lover, and the rest of the Spectators thoughts may censure of that single thought, as of his good parts, or bad, his virtues, or vices, some may praise, others dispraise, and the like; thus a Contemplator can never want Lovers, Admirers, Censurers, nor any other Company, since the Mind can present them with what thoughts they desire, not only the thoughts of Men Women and Children, but of any other Cry∣tures that Nature hath made; for why should not our Spirits or Soul delight and content us, without the real possession of outward Good, as well as the Spirits or Soul doth torment us with a real Evil? for why may not Opinion, or Fancy, as well and as much delight us, as Opinion and Fancy affright us, as they often do?
But an over-studious Mind doth waste the Body, for the Thoughts feeds as much upon the Body, as the Body upon the meat we eat, and the Body nourishes the Thoughts as much as meat nourishes the Body, and for the most part, as the Body is effected so is the Mind, for a distempe∣red Body makes a distempered Mind, as a Luxurious Body makes an Amorous Mind; and a Fever in the Body makes the mind frantic, for the heat of a Fever is like Strong-water, it makes the Spirits drunk, the Thoughts dizzy, and the Mind sick.
Indeed the Body and the Mind do most commonly agree, as in Monarchy the King and the Subjects do, the Subjects obeying the King, and the King commanding the Subjects, yet sometimes the Subjects compel the King, and sometimes the King forces the Subjects, so sometimes the Appetite compels the Reason, at other times the Reason forces the Appetite to a Mo∣deration, and sometimes the Humours of the Body which are like the sense∣less Commonalty, and the Passions of the Soul, which are as the Nobles, of∣tentimes fall out, where sometimes the Humours of the Body usurp with an uproar the Passions of the Soul, and sometimes the Passions overcome the Humours by a wise policy; but when as the Kingdom of Man is in Peace, the Imaginations in the head send down thoughts, as metal into the heart, wherein they are melted and minted into current Coin, each thought as each piece having a several stamp, some is stamped with Hate, some Spite, others Malice; some with Jealousy, some Hope, some with Fear, some Pity, some Love, but that of Love is of the highest value; but these Coins serve for Commerce and Traffic in the Body, from the Authority of the Mind or Soul, whose stamp or Image each piece bears.
Dear Mistress how I love you!
I wish I had Merits worthy your Affections.
You are all a man can wish in women kind, for you are young, fair, virtuous, witty and wise.
Alas all youth hath more follies than years, whereas those that are old, have or ought to have more years than follies.
You might be thought old by your speech and actions, by rea∣son you speak so experienced, and act with such prudence and discretion; wherefore I should judge you were instructed by those that are old, and knew much.
Indeed my Educators were Aged, and my Tutors, like as Pain∣ters, drew with the Pencil of the Tongue, and the Colours of Sense, and the white of Truth, on the Platform of my Brain, many figurate discourses for the Understanding to view, but my Understanding hath weak Eyes.
Your Understanding neither wants sight nor light, but the Lady Faction wants both, or else she had not been so uncivil to you as she was when I was with you last; were not you very Choleric with her?
I am of too Melancholy a Nature to be very Choleric.
Why, are those that are Melancholy never Choleric?
I cannot say never, but yet very seldom, by reason they want that heat which makes Choler; for though the Spirits of Melan∣choly persons may be as quick as those that are Choleric, yet they are not so fiery, for there is as much difference betwixt Melancholy and Choler, as freesing and burning, the one contracts into a sad silence, the other expulses in blows, and many extravagant actions, and angry words; but those persons which are seldom angry, as all Melancholy persons are, who are of a pati∣tient, peaceable Nature, yet when they are angry are very angry; to those persons that are naturally Melancholy, that are seldom seen to be merry or to laugh, yet when they are merry, their mirth is ridiculous, and they will laugh extremely, as at nothing, or at any thing; so those that are naturally Contem∣plative, when they do speak, they speak beyond all sense and reason, their speech flows like as a Torrent, rough and forcibly; thus we may perceive that extremes one way run into extremes another way.
I can truly witness that you are not apt to be angry, or at least not to appear angry; for I did wonder at your humble behaviour, civil ans∣wers, patient demeanours towards the Lady Faction.
I may suffer an injury patiently when I cannot avoid it, but I will never injure my self in doing such actions, or speaking such words as are unbesitting, unworthy and base.
Pray Charge, thank this Gentleman for his gifts and favours to me.
Governess, let me tell you, that they do themselves a courtesy or
favour that do a courtesy or favour to another; and therefore there needs no thanks.
But Lady you ought to thank me, for coming out of my way so far as I have done to see you.
No truly, for if you came out of your way to see me, if it were for affection, it is a duty to Love, if for gratitude, it it is a duty to Obligation, if for civility, it it is a duty to Honour, if for Charity, it it is a duty to Hey∣ven, and where a duty is due, the owner receives but his own when it is paid; wherefore it were a vain and extravagant civility, like unto madness, to give thanks for what is justly their own.
I do confess Lady I am yours, and therefore whatsoever I do, the best of my actions is due to you, and I repent for saying you ought to thank me for coming out of my way to see you, and I crave your pardon for my error, and ask forgiveness for my fault.
I will forgive you, so I may be rid of you, for I love not Comp∣ny but Solitariness.
Sir William Admirer is like Argus, stuck full of Eyes, but Sir William's are the Eyes of fair Ladies that gaze upon him.
The truth is, when he is in the Company of our Sex, all the wo∣men gaze on him.
They may look if they please, and admire him, but I can assure them he loves and admires but one, which is the Lady Peaceable.
Why, is he in love with the Lady Peaceable?
So much as he is to be married to her within two or three days.
I thought he had loved the Lady Faction.
No, no, for he denies that ever he had any Matrimonial love for her.
Will they make a public wedding?
No, it is said the wedding will be kept private.
Where have you been Lady Censurer?
Faith at Court, amongst a Company of Ladies and their Gallants.
And what was their pastime?
Why Singing, Dancing, Laughing, and Jesting; but I have earned an Angel amongst them.
How prithee?
Although not by the sweat of my brows, yet by the expense of my Spirits.
Prithee tell.
Why the Court Ladies in a scornful jesting, for Courtiers love to put persons out of Countenance if they can, prayed me to sing an old Song out of a new Ballad, as knowing my voice fit for no better Songs; but I told them, that if I did sing they should pay me for my pains; for there was never a blind Beggar, or poor young Wench, that sings at a door, but had something given them; they told me they would give me a penny, I ensue∣red, that when they sung to Gentlemen or Ladies guts, that they had a shilling at least given them, and unless they would give me twelve pence a∣piece, I would not sing; so they out of a laughing sport, borrowed a Crown of the Gentlemen to give me.
Oh that's the Court fashion, for the women to borrow of the men.
How should they live if they did not so? for in my Conscience they could not have made up twelve pence amongst a dozen of them, not in money; for their Clothes though costly and rich, yet are worn upon trust; but as I said, I was to sing them a Song for my money; so I sung them an old Song, the burden of the Song, Oh women, women, monstrous women, what do you mean for to do? but because the Song was against women, they would have had me given them their money back again, I told them no I would not, for it was lawful gain for me to keep it, since I gained it by an honest industry, and that those that made a bargain must stick to it; then they told me, that if I would sing them a good old Song, they would give me another Crown; I told them I would have the money in hand, for fear they should dislike my Song when I had sung it, or at least to seem to dislike it, to save their money; so although they were loath, yet at last they borrowed another Crown to give me, thinking it did disgrace me, in that my voice was fit for nothing but old Ballads, for all their Admirers, and Courtly Servants, or Ser∣vents for Courtship were with them; so then I sung them Doctor Faustus that gave his Soul away to the Devil; for I knew Conjurers and Devils pleased women best.
They fright women.
By your favour, all Conjurers gain more by women's coming to them to know their Fortunes, and for to find out losses, than they do by men; for where one man goes to a Conjurer or Fortune-teller, their goes a
hundred women; but as I have told you, I sung the Song of Doctor Faustus.
For my part, I had rather hear a plain old Song, than any Italian, or French Love Songs stuffed with Trilloes.
That's strange, when as in those Harmonious Songs the wisest Poets, and skillfull'st Musicians, are joined to make up one Song, and the most excellent voices are chosen to sing them.
I know not, but I am sooner weary to hear a famous and Artifi∣cial Singer sing than they are themselves with singing, for I hate their Quavers, demi, and semi Quavers, their Minnums, Crochets, and the like.
The truth is, I have observed that when an old Ballad is plainly sung, most hearers will listen with more delight, than to Italian and French Singers, although they sing with art and skill.
The most famous singer in these latter times I have heard in France, it was a woman, and an Italian sent for into France, where she was presented with very rich gifts for her rare singing, yet I durst a-laid my life for a wager, that there were more that could have taken more delight to hear an old Ballad sung, which Ballads are true stories put into verses and set to a Tune, than in all there Italian and French Love whining Songs, and languish∣ing tunes.
Well, but what will you do with your gettings?
Faith I will go home and consider, and the next time I will tell you how I will employ my ten shillings.
What makes you Booted and Spurred, are you going out of the town?
Yes faith, I am going to a wedding, Swish and Spur.
What, art thou going to be married?
No, I am not so hasty, for though I can spur to another mans wedding, I cannot be spurred to my own.
Whose wedding are you riding to?
To Sir William Admirers, and the Lady Peaceable.
Faith their names and marriage do disagree; for never did Husband after the first Month Admire his Wife, nor a Wife after two Months live Peaceably.
How have you employed the ten shillings got by singing?
I must tell you, I have been extremely troubled how to imp∣loy it, insomuch as my Mind hath never been at rest; for their hath been such arguing and disputing and contradiction amongst my Thoughts, as I did verily believe there would have been a mutiny in my head: for first I did resolve to put my ten shillings to pious uses, and then I thought to build some Alms Houses, as building one long room like a Gallery, making in it several Partitions, and the outward doors all alike; these Houses, or rather partitioned rooms, for poor old and infirm persons, that could not work nor beg for their livelihood, to live in; but when I had well considered, that when I had built my Alms Houses, which is as I said one long Room divided by Partitions, I should have nothing left to maintain them, and they to have only House-room, and have neither Meat, Drink, Clothes, nor Fi∣ling to feed them and to keep them from the injuries of the cold, having neither Fires nor Beds, I thought the Parish wherein they were Born, would better provide for them, so that instead of praying for me, they would Curse me; besides I considered, that after I was dead, had I means to leave an al∣lowance, yet when it came for the Magistrates to choose, those that should be put in they would leave out, and choose idle young Housewives, or foul Sluts to dwell therein, such as those Magistrates would visit sometimes, to see what they did want, so as I let that design pass; then I thought to build a Church, and much were my thoughts concerned, whether the Roof should be flat, or vaulted, or sloping; but after I had resolved how the Roof should be, and where the Belfry and Quest-room, I was sore perplexed in my Mind, as where or how to place the Pulpit, whether at the East or West end, or at a Corner in the Church, or at one of the sides of the Church close by the Wall, but at last I resolved it should be placed in the midst of the Church, in the very Centre, that the voice of the Minister might spread round to the Circumference, so as all the Congregation might hear him; but when I con∣sidered that when my Church was bnilt there was neither Benefices, Lands, nor Tithes, nor any allowance for the Minister, and that there was none that did or will preach merely for Gods sake, but for gains sake, as to have a maintenance thereby, or some advancement therefrom, I desisted from that design; then I thought to build a Bedlam, and be the Keeper my self, but I considered that if any of the mad folks should get loose, they might kill me, besides they stink so horribly, and require so much cleansing, not being capa∣ble of keeping themselves clean, as I resolved not to go forward with that design; then I thought to build a free School, and I to be the chief Tutoress my self, but when I remembered the confused noise the Scholars make read∣ing all at once, that neither I could hear nor they understand what they read, I thought it would be to no purpose, because the Scholars would profit but little by their reading, and then I should be thought an ignorant Tutoress; at last I thought to give my ten shillings to the poor Beggars, but when I con∣sidered the Alms that was given to Beggars did more harm than good,
causing them to be idle and lazy, and encouraged them to go roving and To∣guing about, I changed my Mind from that Act, but finding I could not employ my ten shilligns in any pious Act, I thought to employ it in something to be remembered by, as for Fame, whereupon I resolved to build a Pyramid or Cross, the Pyramid to be vastly high, and the Cross to be gloriously gilt, but then searing a Rebellion, and knowing that in a Rebellion a Confused and su∣perstitious rout, would certainly pull them down to the ground, and that when the Cross or Pyramid was down, I should be utterly forgotten, I de∣sisted from that design; so finding as little employment for my money to any famous act as to any pious use, I resolved to employ it to my profit, so then I had a design to set up a Shop of small wares, but when I considered how dead Trading was, and how fast Tradesmen did break, and instead of being enriched became poorer than when first they begun, for to set up a Trade requires some stock, but when they break, they have not only lost their stock, but owe more than ever their stock was, so I went from that design; then I intended to buy me a parcel of Land with my ten shillings, but hearing there was much danger in buying of Land, for that many have mortgaged their Lands to one, and sold them to another, or by an old Deed that hath lain in some old Trunk, Desk, or Box, which may be brought forth to claim the Land again, so as I must be forced to go to Law for my Land I bought, which would cost me more than my Lands, besides the infinite pains and trouble in following my Law Suit, and vexed with quirks, and quilters Lawyers find to prolong the Suit, or else I must let my Land go, so lose it, finding this, I thought to put my money out to use, but then I con∣sidered that first I had only a piece of Parchment for my money, besides, it is a general rule that few or none take up money at use, but those that are Banckrouts, and when they had once got my money into their hands, I should neither get Use or Principal, for should I Imprison them, I should be never the nearer to get my money, for where there is nothing to be had, says the old Proverb, the King must lose his right; after this I intended to build a Ship, and Traffic with it on the Seas, but then considering the Various Winds, the Tempestuous Storms, the rough Seas, the lurking Sands, the dreadful Rocks, the gaping Floods that might split and swallow my Ship, and be drowned my self; I was resolved not to follow that design; then I thought to buy a place at Court, but when I considered how I must cringe and creep, flatter, rail, and be factious, and at last the expenses at Court would be more than the profit of my place, by which I should become a Beggar, or at least a Shark, I left off that design; but after all these considerate∣once I concluded with my self that the most profitablest way to employ my ten shillings was to build a Bawdy house, for I was sure that as soon as ever it was built Customers would resort thereunto; besides it was the most certain gain that was, without any expenses, whereas all other Trades or Profess∣once require means or stocks to begin with, whereas in these Professions or Trade the poorest may set up without borrowing or begging, for a stock to begin with; neither can alterations of times ruin it, for in all times whether Peace or Wars, and in all Nations, this Trade never fails, whereunto if you please to come Ladies, you shall be very welcome.
It will not agree with my humour, for I love Solitariness, and there will be too much Company.
There may be a great resort, but their Conversation is by single Couples.
You are a wag Lady Censurer.
If I were to choose a Wife, I would choose the Lady Solitary.
Why?
Because those that are Solitary love not much Company, and being alone love not much noise, and loving no noise, love silence, and loving silence, love not to talk, so as in having of her, I shall have a Solitary, Peaceable, Quiet, Silent Wife.
And if I were to choose, I would choose the Lady Censurer, for she would let nothing pass her judgment: for she will give her opinion of all things, persons, and actions; so in having her to my Wife, I should have a general Intelligencer, or at least her opinion of all things.
But if her Judgment were not good, her opinion would be iron•os.
I care not, it would serve to pass an idle time with.
And if I might choose, I would choose the Lady Examination for a Wife.
Why?
Because she knows most humours and passages of every body, and their affairs, so by her I should be entertained with news from all ply∣ces, as of all actions done, opinions held, words spoke, or thoughts thought.
I would I could have my wish as easily, as you might have your choice.
What would you wish?
I would wish to be unmarried, for if I were, I would never be troubled with a Wife again; but let me advise you, for I love to have mar∣ried Companions, that you three should go a wooing to those three Ladies, they cannot nor will not deny your Suit, being all three of you rich, young and handsome.
We will take your Counsel.

You hear how this Kingdom of Reformation is proper∣paring for War against the Kingdom of Faction.
Yea, for I hear the Kingdom of Faction resolves to War with this Kingdom of Reformation.
It is true, for there are great preparations of either side, men are raised of all sorts and ages fit to bear Arms, and of all de∣grees to command and obey, and there is one of the gallantest and noblest persons in this Kingdom, which is made General to command in chief, for he is a man that is both valiant and well experienced in Wars, temperate and just in Peace, wise and politic in public affairs, careful and prudent in his own Family, and a most generous person.
Indeed I have heard that he is a most excellent Soldier.
He is so, for he is not one that sets forth to the Wars with great resolutions and hopes, and returns with maskerd fears, and despairs; neither is he like those that take more care, and are more industrious to get gay Clothes, and fine Feathers, to flint in the Field, and vapour in their march, than to get useful and necessary provision; but before he will march, he will have all things ready, and proper for use, as to fit himself with well-tempered Arms, which are light to be worn, yet musket proof; for he means not to run away, nor to yield his life upon easy terms unto his Enemy; for he desires to Conquer, and not vain-gloriously to show his courage by a careless neglect or a vain carelessness; also he chooses such Horses as are use∣full in War, such as have been made subject to the hand and heel, that have been taught to Trot on the Honchos, to change, to Gallop, to stop, and such Horses as have spirit and strength, yet quiet and sober Natures; he regards more the goodness of the Horses than the Colours or marks, and more the fitness of his Saddles than the Embroidery; also he takes more care that his Waggons should be easy to follow, and light in their carriage, than to have them painted and gilded; and he takes greater care that his Tents should be made, so as to be suddenly put up, and as quickly pulled down, than for the setting and Imbrodering his Arms thereupon; also he take more care to have useful Servants than numerous Servants; and as he is industrious and careful for his particular affairs, so he is for the ge∣neral affairs.
A good Soldier makes good preparations, and a good General doth both for himself and Army, and as the General hath showed himself a good Soldier by the preparations he had made to march, so he hath show∣en himself a wise man by the settlement he hath made, in what he hath to leave behind him; for I hear he hath settled and ordered his House and Family.
He hath so, and he hath a fair young and virtuous Lady that he must leave behind him, which cannot choose but trouble him.
The wisest man that is, cannot order or have all things to his own contentment.
My dear heart, you know I am commanded to the Wars, and had I not such Wife as you are, I should have thought Fortune had done me a favour to employ my life in Heroical Actions for the service of my Country, or to give me a honourable Death, but to leave you is such a Cross as my Nature sinks under; but wheresoever you are there will be my life, I shall only carry a Body which may sight, but my Soul and all the powers thereof will remain with thee.
Husband, I shall take this expression of love but for feigning words, if you leave me; for it is against Nature to part with that we love best, unless it be for the beloveds preservation, which cannot be mine, for my life lives in yours, and the comfort of that life in your Company.
I know you love me so well, as you had rather part with my life than I should part from my honour.
It is true, my love persuades me so to do, knowing fame is a double life, as infamy is a double death; nay I should persuade you to those actions, were they never so dangerous, were you unwilling thereunto, or could they create a world of honour, fully inhabited with praises; but I would not willingly part with your life for an imaginary or supposed ho∣nor, which dyes in the womb before it is Born; thus I love you the best, preferring the best of what is yours; but I am but in the second place in your affections, for you prefer your honour before me; it is true, it is the better choice, but it shows I am not the best beloved, which makes you foal∣low and glue to that and leave me.
Certainly Wife my honour is your honour, and your ho∣nor will be buried in my disgrace, which Heaven avert; for I prefer yours before my own, insomuch as I would have your honour to be the Crown of my glory.
Then I must partake of your actions, and go along with you.
What to the VVars?
To any place where you are.
But Wife you consider not, as that long marches, ill lodge∣ings, much watching, cold nights, scorching days, hunger and danger are
ill Companions for Ladies, their acquaintance displeases; their conversation is rough and rude, being too boisterous for Ladies; their tender and strengthless constitutions cannot encounter nor grapell therewith.
It is said, that Love overcomes all things: in your Company long marches will be but as a breathing walk, the hard ground feel as a Fea∣ther-Bed, and the starry Sky a spangled Canopy, hot days a Stove to cure cold Agues, hunger as Fasting days or an eve to devotion, and danger is honours triumphant Chariot.
But Nature hath made women like China, or Pursleyn, they must be used gently, and kept warily, or they will break and fall on Deaths head: besides, the inconveniences in an Army are so many, as put patience her self out of humour; besides, there is such inconveniences as mo∣desty cannot allow of.
There is no immodestly in natural effects, but in unnatural abuses; but contrive it as well as you can, for go I must, or either I shall dye, or dishonour you; for if I stay behind you, the very imaginations of your danger will torture me, sad Dreams will affright me, every little noise will sound as your passing Bell, and my fearful mind will transform every object like as your pale Ghost, until I am smothered in my Sighs, shrouded in my Tears, and buried in my Griefs; for whatsoever is joined with true love, will dye absented, or else their love will dye, for love and life are joined to∣gether; as for the honour of constancy, or constant fidelity, or the dishonour of inconstancy, the lovingest and best wife in all story that is recorded to be, the most perfectest and constantest wife in her Husbands absence was Penelope, Ulysses wife, yet she did not Barricade her Ears from Loves soft Alarms; but parled and received Amorous Treaties, and made a Truce until she and her Lovers could agree and conclude upon conditions, and questionless there were Amorous Glances shot from loving Eyes of either party; and though the Siege of her Chastity held out, yet her Husbands Wealth and Estate was impoverished, and great Riots committed both in his Family and Kingdom, and her Suitors had absolute power thereof; thus though she kept the fort of her Chastity, she lost the Kingdom, which was her Husbands Estate and Government, which was a dishonour both to her and her Husband; so if you let me stay behind you, it will be a thousand to one but either you will lose me in Death, or your honour in Life, where if you let me go you will save both; for if you will consider and reckon all the married women you have heard or read of, that were absented from their Husbands, although upon just and necessary occasions, but had some Ink of aspersions flung upon them, although their wives were old, illfavoured, de∣crepid and diseased women, or were they as pure as light, or as innocent as Heaven; and wheresoever this Ink of aspersions is thrown, it sticks so fast, that the spots are never rubbed out, should it fall on Saints, they must wear the marks as a Badge of misfortunes, and what man had not better be thought or called an uxorious Husband, than to be despised and laughed at, as being but thought a Cuckhold? the first only expresses a tender and noble Nature, the second sounds as a base, cowardly, poor, dejected, forsaken Creature; and as for the immodesty you mentioned, there is none, for there can be no breach of modesty, but in unlawful actions, or at least unnecessary ones; but what Law can warrant, and necessity doth enforce, is allow∣able amongst men, pure before Angels, Religious before Gods, when un∣choosing persons, improper places, unfit times, condemn those actions that
are good in themselves, make them appear base to men, hateful to Angels, and wicked to Gods, and what is more lawful, fitting, and proper, than for a man and wife to be inseparable together?
Well, you have used so much Rhetoric to persuade, as you have left me none to deny you, wherefore I am resolved you shall try what your tender Sex can endure; but I believe when you hear the Bullets fly about you, you will wish your self at home, and repent your rash adventure.
I must prove false first, for love doth give me courage.
Then come along, I shall your courage try.
He follow you, though in Deaths Arms I lie.
Well met, for I was going to thy lodging to call thee to make up the Company of good fellows, which hath appointed a meeting.
Faith you must go with the odd number, or get another in my room, for I am going about some affairs which the Lord General hath im∣ployed me in.
I perceive by thee that public employments spoil private meetings.
You say right, for if every one had good employment, vice would be out of fashion.
What do you call vice?
Drinking, Winching, and Gaming.
As for two of them, as Drinking and Winching, especially Winching, no employment can abolish them, no, not the most severest, devotest, nor dangerest: for the States-man Divines, and Soldiers, which are the most and greatest employed, will leave all other affairs to kiss a Mistress.
But you would have me go to a Tavern and not to a Mistress.
Why, you may have a Mistress in a Tavern if you please.
Well, if my other affairs will give me any leisure, I will come to you.
The Lord General was accounted a discreet and wise man, but he shows but little wisdom in this action of carrying his wife along with him to the VVars, to be a Clog at his heels, a Chain to his hands, an Encumbrance in his march, obstruction in his way; for she will be al∣ways
puling and sick, and whining, and crying, and tired, and •roward, and if her Dog should be left in any place, as being forgotten, all the whole Are∣my must make a halt whilst the Dog is fetched, and Trooper after Trooper must be sent to bring intelligence of the Dogs coming, but if there were such a misfortune that the Dog could not be found, the whole Army must be dispersed for the search of it, and if it should be lost, then there must seem to be more lamentation for it than if the Enemy had given us an entire defeat, or else we shall have frowns instead of preferments.
The truth is, I wonder the General will trouble himself with his wife, when it is the only time a married man hath to enjoy a Mistress with∣out jealousy, a sprightly sound wench, that may go along without trouble, with bag and baggage, to wash his linen, and make his sealed Bed, and at∣tend to his call, when a wife requires more attendance than Centuries to watch the Enemy.
For my part I wonder as much that any man should be so fond of his wife as to carry her with him; for I am only glad of the VVars, because I have a good pretence to leave my wife behind me; besides an Army is a quiet, solitary place, and yields a man a peaceable life compared to that at home: for what with the faction and mutiny amongst his Servants, and the noise the women make, for their tongues like as an Alarm beat up qua∣ters in every Corner of the House, that a man can take no rest; besides every day he hath a set Battle with his wife, and from the Army of her angry thoughts, she sends forth such volleys of words with her Gunpowder anger, and the fire of her fury, as breaks all the ranks and files of content, and puts happiness to an utter rout, so as for my part I am forced to run away in dis∣content, although some Husbands will stay, and fight for the Victory.
Gentlemen, Gentlemen• pray condemn not a man for taking his lawful delight, or for ordering his private affairs to his own humour, every man is free to himself, and to what is his, as long as he disturbs not his Neigh∣bours, nor breaks the Peace of the Kingdom, nor disorders the Common∣wealth, but submits to the Laws, and obeys the Magistrates without dis∣put; besides Gentlemen, it is no crime nor wonder, for a man to let his wife go along with him when he goes to the Wars, for there hath been examples; for Pompey had a wife with him, and so had Germanicus, and so had many great and worthy Heroics, and as for Alexander the great he had a wife or two with him; besides, in many Nations men are not only desired, but commanded by the Chiefs to let their wives go with them, and it hath been a practice by long Custom, for women to be spectators in their Battles, to encourage their fights, and so give fire to their Spirits; also to attend them in their Sicknesses, to cleanse their wounds, to dress their meat; and who is fitter than a wife? what other woman will be so lovingly careful, and in∣dustriously helpful as a wife? and if the Greeks had not left their wives be∣hind them, but had carried them along to the Trojan Wars, they would not have found such disorders as they did at their return, nor had such bad well∣come home, as witness Agamemnons; besides, there have been many women that have not only been Spectators, but Actors, leading Armies, and direct∣ing Battles with good success, and there have been so many of these He∣roicks, as it would be tedious at this time to recount; besides the examples of women's courage in Death, as also their wise conduct, and valiant act∣once in Wars are many, and pray give me leave to speak without your being offended thereat, it is not Noble, nor the part of a Gentleman, to censure,
condemn, or dispraise another mans private actions, which nothing con∣corns him, especially when there is so gallant a subject to discourse of as the discipline and actions of these Wars we are entering into.
In truth Sir, you have instructed us so well, and have chid us so handsomely, as we are sorry for our error, and ask pardon for our fault, and our repentance shall be known by that we will never censure so again.
I have heard our Generals Lady goes with the Gene∣ral her Husband to the Wars, wherefore I think it fit for the rest of the Commanders, if it were only for policy, to let our General see that we approve of his actions so well, as to imitate him in ours, carrying our Wives along with us, besides the Generals Lady cannot chose but take it kindly to have our Wives wait upon her, wherefore Wife it is fit you should go.
Alas Husband I am so tender, that I am apt to catch cold if the least puff of wind do but blow upon me; wherefore to lie in the open Fields will kill me the first Night, if not, the very journey will shatter my small bones to pieces.
Why, our Generals Lady is a very fine young Lady, and she ventures to go.
There let her venture, for you must excuse me, for I will stay at home, go you where you please.
Well Wife consider it.
Wife prepare your self to follow the Army, for it is now the fashion for VVives to march, wherefore pack up and away.
What with a Knapsack behind me as your Trull? not I, for I will not disquiet my rest with inconveniences, nor divert my pleasures with troubles, nor be affrighted with the roaring Cannons, nor endanger my life with every Potgun, nor be frozen up with Cold, nor stewed to a gelly with heat, nor be powdered up with dust, until I come to be as dry
as a Neats-tongue; besides, I will not venture my Complexion to the wroth of the Sun, which will tan me like a Sheeps skin.
Faith Wife, if you will not go, I will have a Landery-Maid to ride in my VVaggon, and lie in my Tent.
Prithee Husband take thy Kitchen Maid along too, for she may have as much Grease about her as will serve to make Soap to wash your Linen with, and while you ride with your Landery-Maid in your Waggon, I will ride with my Gentleman-Usher in my Coach.
Why Wife, it is out of love that I would have thee go.
And it is out of love that I will stay at home; besides, do you think I mean to follow your Generals Lady as a common Trooper doth a Commander, to feed upon her reversions, to wait for her favour, to watch for a smile; no, no, I will be Generalissimo my self at home, and di∣stribute my Colours to be carried in the Hats of those that will fight in my quarrel, to keep or gain the Victory of my favour and love.
So I may chance to be a Cuckhold before I return home.
You must trust to Fortune for that, and so I wish you a good Journey.
I cannot choose but take it unkindly that you will go with∣out me; do you mistrust my affection? as that I have not as much love for you as the Generals Lady hath for her Husband; or do you desire to leave me? because you would take a Mistress along with you, one that per∣chance hath more Beauty than you think me to have; with whom you may securely, and freely sit in your Tent, and gaze upon; or one that hath more wit than I, whose sweet, smooth, and flattering words may charm your thoughts, and draw your Soul out of your ears to sit upon her Lips, or dan∣cing with delight upon her Tongue.
Prithee Wife be not jealous, I vow to Heaven no other Beauty can attract my eyes but thine, nor any sound can please my brain, but what thy charming Tongue sends in; besides, I prise not what thy Body is, but how thy Soul's adorned, thy virtue would make me think thee fair, although thou were deformed, and wittier far than Mercury, had thou Midas's ears, but thou hast all that man can wish of women kind, and that is the reason I will leave thee safe at home; for I am loath to venture all my wealth and happiness in Fortunes inconstant Bark, suffering thy tender youth and Sex to float on the rough waves of chance, where dangers like to Northern winds blow high, and who can know but that fatal gusts may come, and overwhelm thee, and drown all my joys? wherefore for my sake keep thy self safe at home.
I shall obey you, but yet I think it were not well I should be a long time from you, and at a great distance.
I will promise you, if I perceive the War is like to be prolonged, and that there be Garrison-Towns so safe as you may secure∣lie live in, I will send for you, placing you so where sometimes I may visit you.
Pray do not forget me so much as to cancel your promise.
Forget the sweet? I should sooner forget life, and if I do whilst I have memory, Heaven forget me.
I must ask you a question, which is to know why you will take an under command, being so nobly Born, and bearing a high Title of Honour your self, and being Master of a great Estate.
To let the World see my Courage is above my Birth, Wealth, or Pride, and that I prefer inward worth before outward Title, and I had rather give my life to the Enemy on honourable terms, than base∣lie to stay at home in time of general Wars, out of an ambitious discontent: for valour had rather have dangers to sight with, than Offices to com∣mand in.
Why should you go to the Wars now you are in years, and not so fit for action as those that are young, and have their strengths about them? besides, we have lived a married pair above these their∣tie years, and never parted, and shall we now be separated when we are old?
Alas Wife, what would you have me do? when I am commanded out I must obey; besides, I would not have my Country fight a Batrel whilst I live, and I not make one, for all the World, for when I cannot fight, my Body shall serve to stop a breach; wherefore leave your crying Wife, and fall to praying for our safe return, and here my noble friend is desirous you should stay with his Lady to comfort one another, and to divert Melancholy and the longing hours of our return.
Farewell, I fear I shall never see you again, for your absence will soon kill me.
O you are welcome from the Army, what news?
Why our Army marched until they came unto the fron∣tiers of the Kingdom, where they found the Army of the Enemy ready to encounter them, the Lord General seeing they must of necessity fight a Bat∣tel, thought best to call a Council of War, that there might be nothing of
ill conduct laid to his chardge, but that all might be ordered by a wise and experienced Council, whereupon he made an election of Counsellors, joining together three sorts, as grave, wife, and prudent men, subtle and politic men, and valiant, skilful, martial men, that the cold temper of the prudent, might allay the hot temper of the valiant, and that the politic might be as ingenious to serve them together by subtle devises, and to make traps of Stragems to catch in the Enemy, and at this Council many debates there were, but at last they did conclude a Battle must be fought; but first they did decree that all the women should be sent into one of their Garrison Towns, some two days journey from the Army, the reasons were, that if they should be overcome by their Enemies, the women might be taken by their Enemies, and made Slaves, using or abusing them as they pleased; but when the women were sent away, they did not shed tears of sorrow, but sent such volleys of angry words, as wounded many men's hearts; but when they were almost at the Town that was to be their abode, the Ge∣nerals Lady, was so extremely incensed against the Counsellors, by reason they decreed her departure with the others, as she strove to raise up the Spy∣ritz of the rest of her Sex to the height of her own; but what the issue will be I know not.
Have you been with the King?
Yes, I was sent to give him an account of the Army.
Most Heroical Spirits of most chaste and loving Wives, Mi∣stresses, Sisters, Children or Friends, I know you came not from your several Houses and homes into this Army merely to enjoy your Husbands, Lovers, Parents and Friends in their safe and secure Garrisons, or only to share of their troublesome and tedious marches, but to venture also in their dangerous and cruel Battles, to run their Fortunes, and to force Destiny to join you to their Periods; but the Masculine Sex hath separated us, and cast us out of their Companies, either out of their loving care and desire of pre∣serving our lives and liberties, lest we might be destroyed in their confusions, or taken Prisoners in their loss, or else it must be out of jealousy we should Eclipse the fame of their valours with the splendour of our constancy; and if it be Love, let us never give the pre-eminence, for then we should lose that Prerogative that belongs to the Crown of our Sex; and if it be thorough Jealous mistrust of their Fame, it were poor for us to submit and quit that unto men, that men will not unto us, for Fame makes us like the Gods, to live for ever; besides, those women that have staid at home will laugh at us in our return, and their effeminate Lovers and Carpet Knights, that Cow∣ardly and Luxuriously Coin excuses to keep and stay them from the Wars,
will make Lampons of us for them to sing of our disgrace, saying, our Hus∣bands, Lovers, and Friends were so weary of us, as they were forced to take that pretence of affectionate love to be rid of our Companies; wherefore if you will take my advise, let us return, and force those that sent us away to consent that we shall be partakers with them, and either win them by per∣swasions, or lose our selves by breaking their decrees; for it were better we should die by their angry frowns, than by the Tongue of Infamy.
Let us return, let us return.
Noble Heroickesses, I am glad to hear you speak all as with one voice and Tongue, which shows your minds are joined together, as in one piece, without seam or rent; but let us not return unfit to do them service, so we may cause their ruin by obstruction, which will wound us more than can their anger; wherefore let us strive by our industry to render our selves useful to their service.
Propound the way, and set the Rules, and we will walk in the one, and keep strictly to the other.
Then thus, we have a Body of about five or six thousand women, which came along with some thirty thousand men, but since we came, we are not only thought unuseful, but troublesome, which is the rea∣son we were sent away, for the Masculine Sex is of an opinion we are only fit to breed and bring forth Children, but otherwise a trouble in a Common-wealth, for though we increase the Common-wealth by our breed, we en∣cumber it by our weakness, as they think, as by our incapacities, as having no ingenuity for Inventions, nor subtle wit for Politicians; nor prudence for direction, nor industry for execution; nor patience for opportunity, nor judgment for Counsellors, nor secrecy for trust; nor method to keep peace, nor courage to make War, nor strength to defend our selves or Country, or to assault an Enemy; also that we have not the wisdom to govern a Com∣mon-wealth, and that we are too partial to sit in the Seat of Justice, and too pitiful to execute rigorous Authority when it is needful, and the reason of these erroneous opinions of the Masculine Sex to the Effeminate, is, that our Bodies seem weak, being delicate and beautiful, and our minds seem fearful, being compassionate and gentle natured, but if we were both weak and fearful, as they imagine us to be, yet custom which is a second Na∣ture will encourage the one and strengthen the other, and had our educate∣once been answerable to theirs, we might have proved as good Soldiers and Privy Counsellors, Rulers and Commanders, Navigators and Architectors, and as learned Sholars both in Arts and Sciences, as men are; for Time and Custom is the Father and Mother of Strength and Knowledge, they make all things easy and facile, clear and prospitious; they bring acquaintance, and make friendship of every thing; they make Courage and Fear, Strength and Weakness, Difficulty and Facility, Dangers and Securities, Labours and Recreations, Life and Death, all to take and shake as it were hands to∣gether; wherefore if we would but accustom our selves we may do such actions, as may gain us such a reputation, as men might change their opine∣once, insomuch as to believe we are fit to be Copartners in their Govern∣mints,
and to help to rule the World, where now we are kept as Slaves for∣ced to obey; wherefore let us make our selves free, either by force, merit, or love, and in order, let us practise and endeavour, and take that which Fortune shall profer unto us, let us practise I say, and make these Fields as Schools of Martial Arts and Sciences, so shall we become learned in their disciplines of War, and if you please to make me your Tutoress, and so your Generals, I shall take the power and command from your election and Authority, otherwise I shall most willingly, humbly, and obediently submit to those whom you shall choose.
You shall be our Generals, our Instructeress, Ruler and Commanderess, and we will every one in particular, swear to obey all your Commands, to submit and yield to your punishments, to strive and endea∣four to merit your rewards.
Then worthy Heroickesses, give me leave to set the Laws and Rules I would have you keep and observe, in a brass Tablet.
We agree and consent to whatsoever you please.
How painful is true love absented from what is loved, it is strange that that which pleases most should be the greatest tor∣meant.
What, all times walking by your self alone? when your Lord returns I will complain, and tell him what dull Company you are.
I hope I shall not be from him so long, for he promised to send for me.
Nay faith, when you go, as old as I am, I will travel with you to see my Husband too.
You will be so much the more welcome, by how much you were unexpected.
You look pale on the sudden, are not you well?
Yes, only on a sudden I had a chill of cold that seized on my Spirits.
Beshrew me, their coldness hath nipped the blood out of your Cheeks and Lips.
If they had been painted, they would have kept their Colour.
Noble Heroics, these are the Laws our Generals hath caused to be inscribed and read for every one to observe and keep.
First, Be it known, observed and practised, that no woman that is able to bear Arms, shall go unarmed, having Arms to wear, but shall wear them at all times, but when they put them off to change their linen; they shall Sleep, Eat and Rest, and march with them on their Bodies.
Give me leave Noble Heroics to declare the reason of this Law or Command, as to wear an Iron or Steel Habit, and to be so con∣stantly worn, is, that your Arms should not feel heavy, or be troublesome or painful for want of use, as they will be when you shall have an occasion to put them on; and certainly, for want of practice, more Masculine Soldiers are overcome by their Arms, than by their Enemies, for the unaccustomed∣nos makes them so unwieldy, as they can neither defend themselves, nor assault their Foes, whereas Custom will make them feel as light, as their Skins on their Flesh, or their Flesh on their Bones, nay Custom hath that force, as they will feel as if their Bodies were Naked, when as their Arms are off, and as Custom makes the Cold and piercing Air to have no power over the naked Bodies of men, for in cold Countries as well as hot, men have been accustomed to go naked, and have felt no more harm, nor so much, by the cold, than those that are warmly Clothed, so Custom will make your Arms seem as light as if you had none on, when for want of use their weight will seem heavy, their several pieces troublesome and incombersome, as their Gorge•ts will seem to press down their Shoulders, their Back and Breast-plates and the rest of the several pieces to cut their waste, to pinch their Body, to bind their Thighs, to tie their Arms, and their Headpiece to hinder their breath, to darken their sight, and to stop their hearing, and all for want of •se and Custom; but enough of this, read on.
Secondly, Be it known, observed and practised, that every Com∣pany must watch by turns, whether they have Enemies near or no, and at all times, and whosoever Drinks any thing but Water, or Eats any thing but Bread, all the time they are on the watch shall be punished with fasting.
Give me leave to declare the reason of this Law, the reason is, that strong Drinks, and nourishing meats send many vapours to the Brain, which vapours are like several Keys, which lock up the Senses so fast, as neither loud noises, bright lights, nor strong scents can enter either at the Ears, Eyes, or Nostrils, insomuch as many times their Enemies send Death to break them asunder.
Thirdly, Be it known, observed and practised, that none of the Troopers march over Corn Fields if it can be avoided, unless the Enemy should be behind, and then the more spoil the better.
The reason of this is, that it were a great imprudence to de∣stroy through a careless march of Horse and Foot, that which would serve to feed and nourish us in the Winter time, and in our Winter Quarters, when it is laid in the Barns and Granaries, by the labour and the industry of the Farmers.
Fourthly, Be it known, observed and practised, that none shall plunder those things which are weighty of carriage, unless it be for safety or necessity.
The reason is of this, that all that is heavy in the carriage is a hindrance in our march.
Fiftly, Be it known, observed and practised, that no Soldiers shall play at any Game for money or drink, but only for meat to eat.
The reason of this is, that those that play for drink, the winners will be drunk, and those that are drunk are unfit for service; be∣sides, many disorders are caused by drunkenness; and to play for money, the losers grow Choleric, and quarrels proceed therefrom, which quarrels many times cause great mutinies through their side taking, and factious parties, besides, having lost their money and not their Appetites, they be∣come weak and faint for want of that nourishing food, their money should get them, having nothing left to buy them victuals withal; besides, it forces them to forage further about, where by straggling far from the body of the Army, they are subject to be caught by the Enemy, but when they play for meat their winnings nourish their Bodies, making them strong and vigo∣rous, and when their Appetites are satisfied, and their Stomachs are filled, their humours are pleasant, and their minds courageous; besides, it is the Nature of most Creatures, either to distribute or at least to leave the re∣maining pieces to the next takers, so that the losers may have a share with the winners, and part of what was their own again.
Sixtly, Be it known, observed and practised, that no Captains or Colonels, shall advance beyond their Company, Troop, Regiment or Brigade, but keep in the middle of the first rank, and the Lieutenant, or Lieutenant Colonel to come behind in the last rank.
The reason of this is, that Colonels and Captains going a space before their Troops, Companies or Regiments, for to encourage and lead on their Soldiers, do ill to set themselves as marks for the En∣my to shoot at, and if the Chief Commanders should be killed, the Com∣mon Soldiers would have but faint hearts to fight, but for the most part they will run away, as being afraid and ashamed to see the Enemy, when their Chief Commander is killed, and if they have no Officer or Commander behind them, the Common Soldiers will be apt to run away, having no worthy witnesses or Judges, to view and condemn their base Cowardly act∣once, which otherwise they are ashamed of, choosing rather to fight their En∣mies than to make known their fears.
Seventhly, Be it known, observed and practised, that none of the Army lie in Garrison Towns, but be always entrenched abroad.
The reason of this is, that Towns breed or beget a ten∣dearness of Bodies, and laziness of limbs, luxurious Appetites, and soften the natural dispositions, which renderness, luxury, effeminacy, and laziness,
corrupts and spoils martial discipline, whereas the open Fields, and casting up trenches makes Soldiers more hardy, laborious and careful, as being more watchful.
Eightly, Be it known, observed and practised, that none unless visibly sick to be idle, but employed in some Masculine action, as when not employ∣ed against an Enemy; and that they are not employed about the works, forts or trenches, but have spare time to employ themselves, in throwing the Bar, Tripping, Wrestling, Running, Vaulting, Riding, and the like exercise.
Ninthly, Be it known, observed and practised, that every Com∣mander when free from the Enemies surprizals, shall train their men thrice a week at least, nay every day if they can spare so much time, as putting their Soldiers into several ranks, files and figures, in several Bodies apart, changing into several places, and the like.
The reason of this is, that the Soldiers may be expert and ready, and not be ignorant when they encounter their Enemies, for many a Battle is lost more through the ignorance of the Soldiers, not being well and carefully trained by their Commanders, or having such Commanders that know not how to train or draw them up, there are more Battles I say lost thus, than for want of men or courage.
Tenthly, Be it known, observed and practised, that every Morn∣ing when Encamped, that every Commander shall make and offer in the midst of his Soldiers a Prayer to Mars, another to Pallas, a third to For∣tune, and a fourth to Fame; these Prayers to be presented to these Gods and Goddesses with great Ceremony, both from the Commander and Common Soldiers.
The reason of this is, that Ceremony strikes a reverence and respect into every breast, raising up a devotion in every heart, and devo∣tion makes obedience, and obedience keeps order, and order is the strength and life to an Army, State, or Common-wealth; and as for the Prayers presented to these particular Gods and Goddess, is, that Mars would give us courage and strength, Pallas give us prudent conduct, Fortune give us Victory, and Fame give us Glory and Renown.
Eleventhly, Be it known, observed and practised, that the most experienced, practised, and ingenioust Commanders shall preach twice a week of Martial Discipline, also those errors that have been committed in former Wars, and what advantages have been taken, to be cited in their Sermons, as also what was gained or lost by mere Fortune.
Twelfthly, Be it known, observed and practised, that when the Army marches, that the Soldiers shall sing in their march the heroical actions done in former times by heroical women.
The reason of this is, that the remembrance of the actions of gallant persons inflames the Spirit to the like, and begets a courage to a like action, and the reason of singing of heroical actions only of women, is that we are women our selves.
Thirteenthly, Be it known, observed and submitted to, that no Council shall be called, but that all affairs be ordered and judged by the Generals her self.
The reason of this is, that all great Councils, as of many persons, confounds judgments, for most being of several opinions, and hold∣ing strongly and stiffly, nay obstinately thereunto, as every one thinking them∣selves
wisest, cause a division, and wheresoever a division is there can be no final conclusion.
Fourteenthly, Be it known, observed and practised, that none of this Effeminate Army admits of the Company of men, whilst they are in Arms or Warlike actions, not so much as to exchange words, without the Generals her leave or privilege thereto.
The reason of this is, that men are apt to corrupt the no∣ble minds of women, and to alter their gallant, worthy, and wise resolute∣once, with their flattering words, and pleasing and subtle insinuations, and if they have any Authority over them, as Husbands, Fathers, Brothers, or the like, they are apt to fright them with threats into a slavish obedience; yet there shall be chosen some of the most inferior of this Female Army, to go into the Masculine Army, to learn their designs, and give us intelligence of their removals, that we may order our incampings and removings according as we shall think best; but these women shall neither be of the Body of our Army, nor keep amongst the Army, nor come within the Trenches, but lie without the works in Huts, which shall be set up for that purpose.
Lastly, Whosoever shall break any of these Laws or Orders, shall be put to Death, and those that do not keep them strictly, shall be severely punished.
But I am to advise you Noble Heroics, that though I would not have a general Council called to trouble our designs in War with tedious disputes, and unnecessary objections, and over cautious doubts, yet in case of life and death, there shall be a Jury chosen to sit and judge their Cau∣ses, and the whole Army shall give their votes, and the most voices shall ei∣there condemn, or reprieve, or save them, lest I should hereafter be only called in question, and not the rest, as being not accessory thereunto; and now you have heard these Laws or Orders, you may assent or dissent therefrom as you please, if you assent, declare it by setting your hands thereto, if you dissent, declare it by word of mouth, and the Tables shall be broken.
We assent, and will set our hands thereto.
Nil, how doth your good Lady?
Faith she seems neither sick nor well, for though her Body seems in health, her Mind seems to be full of trouble, for she will rise in the midst of the Night, and walk about her Chamber only with her Mantle about her.
Why doth she so?
I asked her why she broke her sleep so as to walk about, and she answered me, that it was frightful Dreams that broke her sleep, and would not let her rest in quiet.
Alas she is Melancholic in the absence of my Lord.
Now we are resolved to put our selves into a Warlike body, our greatest difficulty will be to get Arms; but if you will take my advise we may be furnished with those necessaries, as thus, the Garrison we are to enter is full of Arms and Ammunition, and few men to guard them, for not only most of the Soldiers are drawn out to strengthen the Generals Army, and to fight in the battle, but as many of the Townsmen as are fit to bear Arms; wherefore it must of necessity be very slenderly guarded, and when we are in the Town, we will all agree in one Night, when they shall think themselves most secure, to rise and surprise those few men that are left, and not only disarm them and possess our selves of the Town and all the Arms and Ammunition, but we will put those men out of the Town or in safe places, until such time as we can carry away whatsoever is useful or need∣full for us, and then to go forth and entrench, until such time as we have made our selves ready to march, and being once Master or Mistress of the Field we shall easily Master the Peasants, who are for the most part naked and de∣fenceless, having not Arms to guard them, by which means we may plunder all their Horses, and victual our selves out of their Granaties; besides, I make no question but our Army will increase numerously by those women that will adhere to our party, either out of private and home discontents, or for honour and fame, or for the love of change, and as it were a new course of life; wherefore let us march to the Town and also to our design, but first I must have you all swear secrecy.
We are all ready to swear to what you will have us.
I saw his Face pale as a Lily white,
His wounds fresh bleeding blood like rubies bright;
His Eyes were looking steadfastly on me,
Smiling as joying in my Company;
He moved his lips as willing was to speak,
But had no voice, and all his Spirits weak;
He shook his hand as if he bid farewell,
That brought the message which his tongue would tell;
He's dead, he's dead, a sunder break my heart,
Let's meet in Death, though Wars our lives did part.
What news? what news?
Sad news, for there hath been a Battle fought betwixt the two Armies, and our Army is beaten, and many of our gallant men slain.
I am sorry for that.
Sir I suppose you are come newly from the Army, pray report the Battle?
Truly I came not now from the Army, but from the Town the Generals heroical Lady and the rest of the heroics did surprise, seize and plunder.
What the Garrison Town they were sent to for safety?
Yes.
And doth their number increase?
O very much, for after the suprisal of the Town the women in that Town did so approve of their gallant actions, as every one desired to be enlisted in the roll, and number of the Amazonian Army, but in the mean time of the forming of their Army, intelligence was brought of the Battle which was fought, and that there was such loss of both sides as each Army retired back, being both so weak as neither was able to keep the Field, but that the loss was greater on the reformed Army, by reason there was so many of their gallant men slain, but this news made many a sad heart and weeping eyes in the Female Army; for some have lost their Husbands, some their Fathers, others their Brothers, Lovers and Friends.
Certainly this will fright them out of the Field of War, and cause them to lay by their Heroic designs.
I know not what they will do, for they are very secret to their de∣signs, which is strange, being all women.
Our Generals seems to be troubled, perceiving how hey∣vilely this Female Army takes their losses.
She hath reason, for it may hinder or at least obstruct her high designs.
Noble Heroics, I perceive a mourning veil over the Face of this Female Army, and it becomes it well; for it is both natu∣ral and human to grieve for the Death of our friends; but consider con∣stant Heroics, tears nor lamentations cannot call them out of the grave, no petitions can persuade Death to restore them, nor threats to let them go, and since you cannot have them alive being Dead, study and be industrious to revenge their quarrels on their Enemies lives, let your justice give them Death for Death, offer upon the Tombs of your Friends the lives of their Foes, and instead of weeping Eyes, let us make them weep through their Veins; wherefore take courage, cast off your black Veil of Sorrow, and take up the Firematch of Rage, that you may shoot Revenge into the hearts of their Enemies, to which I hope Fortune will favour us; for I hear that as soon as the Masculine Army have recovered strength there will be ano∣there Battle fought, which may be a means to prove our loves to our Friends, our hate to our Enemies, and an aspiring to our honour and renown; wherefore let us employ our care to fit our selves for our march.
We shall follow and obey you, where, and when, and how you please.
Doth my Lady hear of my Lords Death?
The Messenger or Intelligencer of my Lords Death is now with her.
How died my Lord?
Madam, he fought with so much courage, as his actions will never dye, and his valour will keep alive the memory of this War: for though he died, his Death was Crowned with Victory, he dug his Grave out of his Enemies sides, and built his Pyramid with heaps of their Bodies, the groans of those he slew did ring his dying Knell.
What became of his body?
He gave order before the Armies joined to fight, that if he were killed, his body should be sought out, and delivered to you: for he said it was yours whilst he lived, and he desired it might be disposed of by you when he was dead; his desires and commands were obeyed, and his body is coming in a Litter lapped in Searcloth.
Worthy Sir, I give you many thanks for your noble rela∣tion, assuring my self it is true because you report it, and it is my Husband that is the subject and ground of that honourable relation, whom I always did believe would out-act all words.
He hath so Madam.
Sir, if I can at any time honourably serve you, I shall be ready whenever you will command me.
Your Servant Madam.
If your Ladyship hath not heard of Monsieur la Hardy's Death, give me leave to tell you he is slain.
I am sorry, and for his Lady, for she loved him most passionably.
Help, help, my Lady is dead, my Lady is fallen into a swooned at the report of my Masters being killed.
Alas poor Lady, her Spirits are drowned in Sorrow, and Grief hath stopped her breath; loosen her Garments, for she is swelled with troubled Thoughts, her Passions lie on heaps, and so oppress life, it cannot stir, but makes her senseless.
O my Husband, my Husband!
Bow her forward, bow her forward.
O let me dye, let me dye, and bury, bury me with him.
Alas poor Lady, put her to Bed, for her life will find most case there.
O life what art thou? and Death where doest thou lead us, or what dissolv'st thou us into?
I wonder there is no news or Messenger come from the Army yet, when there usually comes one every day.
O Sir, what news?
Faith there hath been nothing acted since the last Battle, but
it is said there will be another Battle very suddenly, for the Enemy provokes our men to fight, by reason our Lord General lies sick of his wounds, having had a Fever, caused by the anguish of his hurts, and by his Sickness the Enemies hope to gain an advantage of his absence, but he hath put a De∣putty in his place to command in chief until he recovers.
What is become of the Female Army?
I hear they are marched towards the Masculine Army, but upon what design I cannot understand.
Call my Steward.
O Madam, that I should live to hear this cursed news of my dear Lord and Masters Death.
Life is a curse, and there's none happy but those that dye in the womb before their birth, because they have the least share of misery; and since you cannot weep out life, bear it with patience; but thy tears have almost washed out the memory of what I was to say, but this it is, that I would have you sell all my Jewels, Plate, and Household Furniture to the best advantage, and to turn off all my Servants, but just those to attend my person, but to reward all of them with something more than their wa∣ges, and those Servants that are old, and have spent their youth with my Lords Predecessors and in his service, but especially those he favoured most, give them so much during their lives as may keep them from the miseries of necessity, and vexations of poverty. Thirdly, I would have you hire the best and curioust Carvers or Cutters of Stones to make a Tomb after my direct∣on; as First I will have a marble piece raised from the ground about half a mans height or something more, and something longer than my Husbands dead body, and then my Husbands Image Carved out of Marble to be laid thereupon, his Image to be Carved with his Armour on, and half a Head-piece on the Head, that the face might be seen, which face I would have to the life as much as Art can make it; also let there be two Statues, one for Mercury, and another for Pallas, these two Statues to stand at his head, and the hands of these Statues to join and to be laid under as carry∣ing the head of my Husbands figure, or as the head lay thereupon, and their hands as his Pillow; on the right side of his figure, let there be a Statue for Mars, and the hand of Mars's Statue holding the right hand of my Hus∣bands figure, and on the left hand a Statue for Hymen, the hand on the place of the heart of my Husbands figure, and at the feet of the figure let
there be placed a Statue for Fortune also, about a yard distance from the Tomb; at the four Corners thereof, let there be four Marble Pillars raised of an indifferent height, and an Arched Marble Cover thereupon, and let all the ground be paved underneath with Marble, and in the midst on the out∣side of the marble roof let the Statute of Fame be placed in a flying posture, and as blowing a Trumpet; then some two yards distance square from those Pillars, let the ground be paved also with Marble, and at the four Corners four other Marble Pillars raised as high as the former, with Capitals at top, and the body of those Pillars round, and the Statues of the four Cardinal Virtues placed on those Capitals, sitting as in a weeping posture, and at the feet of those Pillars the Statues of the Graces embracing each Pillar; as the Statue of Charity, the Pillar whereon the Statue of Justice sits, and the Statue of Patience, the Pillar of Temperance, and the Statute of Hope, the Pillar of Prudence, and the Statue of Faith, the Pillar of Fortitude; then set a grove of Trees all about the out-side of them, as Laurel, Myrtle, Cypress, and Olive, for in Death is Peace, in which Trees the Birds may sit and sing his Elegy; this Tomb placed in the midst of a piece of ground of some ten or twenty Acres, which I would have encompassed about with a Wall of Brick of a reasonable height, on the inside of the Wall at one end, I would have built a little house divided into three Rooms, as a Gallery, a Bed-chamber, and a Closet, on the outside of the Wall a House for some necessary Servants to live in, to dress my meat, and to be ready at my call, which will be but seldom, and that by the ring of a Bell, but the three Rooms I would have furnished after this manner, my Chamber and the Bed therein to be hung with white, to signify the Purity of Chastity, wherein is no Co∣lours made by false lights; the Gallery with several Colours intermixed, to signify the varieties, changes, and incombrances of life; my Closet to be hung with black, to signify the darkness of Death, wherein all things are forgotten and buried in Oblivion; thus will I live a signification, not as a real substance but as a shadow made betwixt life and death; from this House which shall be my living Tomb, to the Tomb of my dead Husband, I would have a Cloister built, through which I may walk freely to my Husbands Tomb, from the injuries of the weather, and this Cloister I would have all the sides thereof hung with my Husbands Pictures drawn to the life by the best Painters, and all the several accidents, studies and exercise of his life; thus will I have the story of his life drawn to the life: see this my desire speedily, carefully, and punctually done, and I shall reward your service as a careful and diligent Steward and Servant.
It shall be done, but why will not your Ladyship have my Lords figure cast in Brass?
Because the Wars ruin Tombs before Time doth, and metals being useful therein are often taken away by necessity, and we sell∣dome find any ancient Monuments but what are made of Stone, for cove∣tousness is apt to rob Monuments of metal, committing Sacrileges on the dead, for metals are soonest melted into profit, but Stone is dull and heavy, creeping slowly, bringing but a cold advantage, wherein lies more pains than gains.
But your Ladyship may do all this without selling your Jewels, Plate, and Household Furniture.
It is true, but I would not let so much wealthly dead in Vanity, when exchanging them for money, I can employ it to some good use.
Your Ladyship hath forgotten to give order for blacks.
No I have not, but I will give no mourning until my Husbands body be carried to the Tomb; wherefore I have nothing more to employ you in at this time, but only to send hither my Chaplain Doctor Educature.
Doctor, although it is not the profession of a Divine to be an Historian, yet you knowing my Husbands life and natural disposition best, being in his Childhood under you Tutorage, and one of his Family ever since, I know none so proper for that work as you; and though you are natu∣rally an eloquent Orator, yet the bare truth of his worthy Virtues and He∣roical actions will be sufficient to make the story both profitable, delightful, and famous; also I must entreat you to choose out a Poet, one that doth not merely write for gain, or to express his own wit, so much as to endea∣four to Pencil with the pen Virtue to the life, which in my Lord was so beautiful as it was beyond all draughts, but the theme will inspire his Muse, and when both these works are writ, printed and set out, as divulged to the World as a pattern for examples, which few will be able to imitate, then I would have these books lie by me as Registers of memory, for next unto the Gods my life shall be spent in Contemplation of him; I know I shall not need to persuade you to do this, for your affection to his memory is ready of it self; but love and duty binds me to express my desires for his Fame leaving nothing which is for my part thereunto.
Madam, all the service I can do towards the memory of my dear Pupil; and noble Lord and Patron, shall be most devoutly obser∣ved and followed; for Heaven knows, if I had as many lives to dispose of as I have lived years, I would have Sacrificed them all for to have redeemed his life from Death.
When I have interred my Husbands body, and all my de∣sires thereunto be finished, I shall be at some rest, and like an Executrix to my self executing my own will, distributing the Rites and Ceremonies, as Legacies to the dead, thus the living gives the dead; but O my Spirits are tired with the heavy burden of Melancholy, and grow faint for want of rest, yet my senses invite me thereunto, yet I cannot rest in my Bed, for fright∣full Dreams disturb me; wherefore I will lie down on this floor, and try if I can get a quiet sleep on the ground, for from Earth I came, and to Earth I would willingly return.
Weep cold Earth, through your pores weep,
Or in your bowels my salt tears fast keep;
Inurn my sighs which from my grief is sent,
With my hard groans build up a Monument;
My Tongue like as a pen shall write his name,
My words as letters to divulge his fame;
My life like to an Arch over his Ashes bend,
And my desires to his grave descend;
I warn thee Life keep me not Company,
I am a friend to Death thy Enemy;
For thou art cruel, and every thing torments,
Wounding with pain all that the World presents;
But Death is generous and sets us free,
Breaks off our Chains, and gives us liberty;
Heals up our wounds of trouble with sweet rest,
Draws our corrupted passions from our breast;
Lays us to sleep on Pillows of soft case,
Rocks us with silence nothing hears nor sees.
O that I may here sleep my last.
If it were not for Dreams sleep would be a happiness next unto Death; but • find I cannot sleep a long sleep in Death, I shall not dye so soon as I would.
Love is so strong and pure it cannot die,
Lives not in sense, but in the Soul doth lye;
Why do I mourn? his love with mins doth dwell,
His love is pleased mine entertains it well;
But mine would be like his one embodied,
Only an Essence or like a Godhood.
How doth our Lady Doll?
To day she began to sit up, but yet she is very weak and faint.
Heaven help her.
You that are Heavens Almner, should distribute Heavens gifts out of the purse of your mouth, and give her single Godly words in∣stead of single silver pence, to buy her some Heavenly food to feed her fa∣meshed mind.
Thou are a full-fed wench.
If I were no better fed than you feed me, which is but once a week, as on Sundays, I should be starved.
You must fast and pray, fast and pray.
All the young Gallants in the Town are preparing themselves with fine Cloths and Feathers to go a wooing to the two rich Wi∣dows, the Lady Iantil, and the Lady Passionate.
Riches are the Loadstone of affection, or at least professions.
The truth is, Riches draw more Suitors, than Youth, Beauty, or Virtue.
For Heavens sake let us go and address our selves to the two Rich Widows.
For my part I will address my self to none but the young Widow, the Lady Iantil, and to her let us go without delay.
It will be uncivil to go so soon after their Husbands Death, for their Husbands are not yet laid in their Graves.
If they were we should come too late, for I knew a man which was a great friend of mine, who was resolved to settle himself in a married course of life, and so he went a wooing to a Widow, for a Widow he was resolved to marry, and he went a wooing to one whose Husband was but just cold in his grave, but she told him she was promised before, so he wooed another whilst she followed her Husbands Corps, but she told him he came too late, whereat he thought with the third not to be a second in his Suit, and so expressed his desires in her Husbands sickness, she told him she was very sorry that she had past her word before to another, for if she had not, she would have ma le him her choice, whereat he cursed his impru∣dence, and wooed the fourth on her wedding day, who gave him a promise after her Husband was dead to marry him, and withal she told him, that if she had been married before, it had been ten to one but he had spoke too late, for said she, when we are Maids we are kept from the free conversation of men, by our Parents or Guardians, but on our wedding day we are made free and set at liberty, and like as young Heirs on the day of one and twenty we make promises like bonds for two or three lives: wherefore I fear we shall miss of our hopes, for these two Widows will be promised before we address our Suit.
No no, for I am confident all do not so, for some
love to have the freedoms of their wills, for every promise is a bondage to those that make a Conscience to keep their promise, besides, it is not only variety that pleases women, but new Changes, for stale Acquaintance is as unpleasant as want of change, and the only hopes I have to the end of my Suit, is, that I am a Stranger and unknown, for women fancy men beyond what they are when unknown, and prize them less than their merits de∣serve, when they are acquainted.
Well, we will not stay, but we will do our indea∣four to get admittance.
Madam, how do you find your health?
Very bad, for I am very ill, but I wonder at your Fortitude, that you can bear such a Cross as the loss of your Husband so patiently.
O Madam I am like those that are in a Dropsy, their face seems full and fat, but their liver is consumed, and though my sorrow ap∣pears not outwardly, yet my heart is dead within me.
But your young years is a Cordial to restore it, and a new love will make it as healthful as ever it was.
Pray Madam eat something, or otherwise you will kill your self with fasting, for you have not eaten any thing since the beginning of your sorrow.
O carry that Caudle away, carry it away, for the very sight doth overcome my Stomach.
Pray Madam eat but a little.
I care not for it, I cannot eat it, nor will not eat it: where∣fore carry it away, or I will go away.
Prithee if thy Lady will not eat this Caudle, give it me, for I have an Appetite to it; but I wonder you will offer your Lady any thing to eat, but rather you should give her something to drink, for I have heard sorrow is dry, but never heard it was hungry.
You are mistaken, for sorrow is sharp, and bites upon the Stomach, which causes an eager Appetite.
I am sure weeping eyes make a dry Throat.
But Melancholy Thoughts make a hungry Stomach: but faith if thou were a Widow, by thy eating thou would have another Hus∣band quickly.
Do you think I would marry again.
Heaven forbid that a young woman should live a Widow.
Why, is it a sin for a young woman to live a Widow?
I know not what it would be to you, but it would be a case of Conscience to me if I were a Widow.
By thy nice Conscience thou seem to be a Puritan.
Well, I can bring many proofs: but were it not a sin, it is a disgrace.
Where lies the disgrace?
In the opinion of the World, for old Maids and musty VVi∣dows are like the plague shunned of by all men, which affrights young women so much, as by running from it they catch hold on whatsoever man they meet, without consideration of what or whom they are, by which many times they fall into poverty and great misery.
You teach a Doctrine, that to escape one mischief they fall on another, which is worse than the first; wherefore it were better to live a musty VVidow as you call them, than a miserable Wife; besides, a man cannot intimately love a VVidow, because he will be a Cuckold, as being made one by her dead Husband, and so live in Adultry, and so she live in sin her self by Cuckolding both her Husbands, having had two.
I believe if you were a VVidow you would be tempted to that sin.
Faith but I should not, for should I commit that sin, I should deserve the Hell of discontent.
Faith you would marry if you were young, and fair, and rich.
Those you mention would keep me from marrying: for if any would marry me for the love of youth and beauty, they would never love me long, because time ruins both soon; and if any one should marry me merely for my riches, they would love my riches so well and so much as there would be no love left for me that brought it, and if my Husband be ta∣ken Prisoner by my wealth, I shall be made a Slave.
No, not if you be virtuous.
Faith there is not one in an Age that takes a wife merely for virtue, nor valews a wife any thing the more for being so; for poor Fire∣tu fits mourning unregarded and despised, not any one will so much as cast an eye towards her, but all shun her as you say they do old Maids or musty Widows.
Although you plead excellently well for not marrying, yet I make no question but you would willingly marry if there should come a young Gallant.
What's that, a Fool that spends all his wit and money on his Clothes? or is it a gallant young man, which is a man enriched with worth and merit?
I mean a Gallant both for bravery and merit.
Nay, they seldom go both together.
Well, I wish to Heaven that Hymen would give thee a Hus∣band, and then that Pluto would quietly take him away to see whether you
would marry again, O I long for that time.
Do not long too earnestly, lest you should miscarry of your desires.
Who was it that run away?
Nil Careless Madam Iantils Maid.
O that I could contract a bargain for such an indiffe∣rent mind as her young Lady hath, or that the pleasures of the World could bury my grief.
There is no way for that Madam, but to please your self still with the present times, gathering those fruits of life that are ripe, and next to your reach, not to endanger a fall by climbing too high, nor to stay for that which is green, nor to let it hang whilst it is rotten with time, nor to mur∣mur for that which is blown down by chance, nor to curse the weather of accidents for blasting the blossoms, nor the Birds and VVorms of Death, which is sickness and pain, for picking and eating the berries, for nature al∣lows them a part as well as you, for there is nothing in the World we can absolutely possess to our selves; for Time, Chance, Fortune and Death, hath a share in all things, life hath the least.
I think so, for I am weary of mine.
Mistress Dorothy, there are two or three Gentlemen that desire to speak with one of the VVidows Maids, and you belong to one.
Well, what is their business?
I know not, but I suppose they will only declare that to your self.
Gentlemen, would you speak with me?
Yes, for we desire you will help us to the honour of kissing your Ladies hands, thereon to offer our service.
Sir, you must excuse me, for the Sign of VVidowhood is not as yet hung out, Mourning is not on, nor the Scurcheons are not hung over the Gate, but if you please to come two or three days hence I may do you some service, but now it will be to no purpose to tell my Lady, for I am sure she will receive no visits.

Good Master Priest go comfort my old Lady.
If you will Comfort me, I will strive to Com∣fort her.
So we shall prove the Crumbs of Comfort.
But is my Lady so sad still?
Faith to day she hath been better than I have seen her, for she was so patient as to give order for Blacks; but I commend the young Lady Madam Iantil, who bears out the Siege of Sorrow most Courage∣ously, and on my Conscience I believe will beat grief from the fort of her heart, and become victorious over her misfortunes.
Youth is a good Soldier in the Warfare of Life, and like a valiant Cornet or Ensign, keeps the Colours up, and the Flag flying, in despite of the Enemies, and were our Lady as young as Madam Iantil, she would grieve less, but to lose an old Friend after the loss of a young Beauty is a double, nay a treble affliction, because there is little or no hopes to get another good Husband, for though an old woman may get a Hus∣band, yet ten thousand to one but he will prove an Enemy, or a Devil.
It were better for my Lady if she would marry again, that her Husband should prove a Devil than a Mortal Enemy, for you can free her from the one though not from the other, for at your words, the great Devil will avoid or vanish, and you can bind the lesser Devils in Chains, and whip them with holy Rods until they roar again.
Nay, we are strong enough for the Devil at all times, and in all places, neither can he deceive us in any shape, unless it be in the shape of a young Beauty, and then I confess he overcomes us, and torments our hearts in the fire of love, beyond all expression.
If I were a Devil I would be sure to take a most beautiful shape to torment you, but my Lady will torment me if I stay any lone∣ger here.
Sir, you being newly come from the Army, pray what news?
I suppose you have heard how our Army was forced to fight by the Enemies provocations, hearing the Lord General lay sick, whereupon the Generals Lady the Lady Victoria, caused her Amazonians to march towards the Masculine Army, and to entrench some half a mile di∣stance therefrom, which when the Masculine Army heard thereof, they were very much troubled thereat, and sent a command for them to retreat back, fearing they might be a disturbance, so a destruction unto them by, do∣ing some untimely or unnecessary action; but the Female Army returned the Masculine Army an Answer, that they would not retreat unless they were beaten back, which they did believe the Masculine Sex would not, ha∣avenge more honour than to fight with the Female Sex; but if the men were so base, they were resolved to stand upon their own defence; but if they would let them alone, they would promise them upon the honour of their words not to advance any nearer unto the Masculine Army, as long as the Miscue∣line Army could assault their Enemies, or defend themselves, and in this posture I left them.
Noble Heroickesses, I have intelligence that the Army of Reformations begins to flag, wherefore now or never is the time to prove the courage of our Sex, to get liberty and freedom from the Female Slavery, and to make our selves equal with men: for shall Men only sit in Honours chair, and Women stand as waiters by? shall only Men in Trium∣phoned Chariots ride, and Women run as Captives by? shall only men be Conquerors, and women Slaves? shall only men live by Fame, and women die in Oblivion? no, no, gallant Heroics raise your Spirits to a noble pitch, to a deaticall height, to get an everlasting Renown, and infinite praises, by honourable, but unusual actions: for honourable Fame is not got only by contemplating thoughts which lie lasily in the Womb of the Mind, and prove Abortive, if not brought forth in living deeds; but worthy Heroic∣esses, at this time Fortune desires to be the Midwife, and if the Gods and Goddesses did not intend to favour our proceedings with a safe deliverance, they would not have offered us so fair and fit an opportunity to be the Mo∣theirs of glorious Actions, and everlasting Fame, which if you be so unna∣tural to strangle in the Birth by fearful Cowardice, may you be blasted with Infamy, which is worse than to dye and be forgotten; may you be whipped with the torturing tongues of our own Sex we left behind us, and may you be scorned and neglected by the Masculine Sex, whilst other women are
preferred and beloved, and may you walk unregarded until you become a Plague to your selves; but if you Arm with Courage and fight valiantly, may men bow down and worship you, birds taught to sing your praises, Kings offer up their Crowns unto you, and honour enthrone you in a mighty power.
May time and destiny attend your will,
Fame be your scribe to write your actions still;
And may the Gods each act with praises fill.
Fear us not, fear us not, we dare and will follow you wheresoever and to what you dare or will lead us, be it through the jaws of Death.
GReat Mars thou God of War, grant that our Squadrons may like unbroaken Clouds move with entire Bodies, let Courage be the wind to drive us on, and let our thick swelled Army darken their Sun of hope with black despair, let us power down showers of their blood, to quench the fiery flames of our revenge.
And where those showers fall, their Deaths as seeds
Sown in times memory sprout up our deeds;
And may our Acts Triumphant gat lands make,
Which Fame may wear for our Heroics sake.
Doll, how doth our Lady since the burying of my Patron?
Faith she begins now to have regard to her health, for she take Iackalato every Morning in her Bed falling, and then she hath a mess of Gelly broth for her Breakfast, and drinks a Cup of Sack before Dinner, and eats a White wine Caudle every afternoon, and for her Supper she hath new laid Eggs, and when she goes to Bed, she drinks a hearty draught of Muskadine to make her sleep well; besides, if she chances to wake in the Night, she takes comfortable Spirits, as Angelica, Aniseeds, Besor, aquami∣rabilis, and the like hot waters, to comfort her heart, and to drive away all Melancholy thoughts.
Those things will do it if it be to be done, but I am sorry that my Lady hath sold all my Patrons Horses, Saddles, Arms, Clothes, and such like things at the Drums head, and by out-cryes, to get a little the more money for them, I fear the World will condemn her, as believing her to be covetous.
O that's nothing, for what she loses by being thought co∣vetous, she will regain by being thought rich, for the World esteems and respects nothing so much as riches.
Pray Sir what news from the Army? you are newly come from thence.
I suppose you have heard how the Effeminate Army was some half a mile from the Masculine Armies; but the Masculine Army being very carnest to fight, not only to get Victory and power, but to revenge each others losses, as their Friends slain in the former B•ttel, which thoughts of revenge did so fire their minds and inflame their Spirits, that if their Eyes had been as much illuminated as their flaming Spirits were, there might have been seen two blazing Armies thus joining their Forces against each other; at last began a cruel fight, where both the Armies fought with such equal Courages and active Limbs, as for a long time neither side could get the bet∣la, but at the last the Army of Faction broke the Ranks and Files of the Army of Reformation, whereupon every Squadron began to fall into a Confusion, no order was kept, no chardge was heard, no command obeyed, terror and fear ran maskerd about, which helped to rout our Army, whereupon the Enemy killed many of our men, and wounded many more, and took numbers of Prisoners; but upon this defeat came in the Female Army, in the time that some of the Enemy was busy in gathering up the Conquered spoils, others in pursuit of the remainders of our men, others were binding up the Prisoners, others driving them to their Quarters like a Company of Sheep to a Market there to be sold; but when as some of the Commanders perceived a fresh Army coming towards them, their General commanded the Trumpets to sound a Retreat to gather them together, and also made haste to order and settle his men in Battle Array, and desirous their General was to have all the Prisoners slain; but the Female Army came up so fast and so close to prevent that mischief, as they had not time to execute that design; but their General encouraged his Soldiers, and bid them not to be disheartened, persuading them not to lose what they had got from an Army of men to an Army of boys, for said he they seem to be no other by the appearance of their shapes and statures; but when the Female Army came to encounter them, they found their charge so hot and furious as made them give place, which advantage they took with that prudence and dexterity, as they did not only rout this Army of Faction, killing and wounding many, and set their own Countrymen at liberty, and recovered their losses, and gained many spoils, and took numbers of Prisoners of their Enemies with Bag and Baggage, but they pursued those that fled into their Trenches, and beat them out of their works, and took possession thereof, where they found much riches; these Trenches being taken, the Lady Victoria took possession, and made them her Quarters, calling all her Female Souldi∣ers to enter therein by the sound of Flutes, which they always used instead of Trumpets, and their Drums were Kettel-Drums; but upon this Victory
the Masculine Sex of the Army of Reformation was much out of Count∣nonce, being doubly or trebly overcome, twice by their Enemy, and then by the gallant actions of the Females which out-did them, yet they thought it best to take their advantage whilst the Victory was fresh and flourishing, and their Enemies weak and fearful, to lay siege to the next Towns in the Enemies Country; whereupon the Lady Victoria and her Female Soldiers hearing of the Army of Reformations designs, for they had sent the men to their own Quarters as soon as the Battle was won and Victory got; Also the Masculine Prisoners they sent to the men's Quarters, not intermixing themselves with the men, but as I said they hearing the design they had to besiege the Towns were much enraged for not making them of their Coun∣cils, whereupon they sent a Messenger like as an Ambassador to tell the Masculine Army they did wonder at their ingratitude, that they should for∣get so much their relievers as to go upon any Warlike design without ma∣king them acquainted therewith, striving as it were to steal the Victory out of their hands, but said they, since we are become victorious over our En∣mies, and Masters, and Mistresses of the Field, by our own valiant actions and prudent conducts, we will maintain our power by our own strengths, for our Army is become now numerous, full and flourishing, formed, and conformable by our Discipline, skilful by our practice, valiant by our reason∣lutions, powerful by our victory, terrible to our Enemies, honourable to our Friends, and a subject of Envy to the Masculine Sex; but your Army is weak and decrepit, sitter for an Hospital than for a Field of War, your power is lost, your courage is cold, your discipline disorderous, and your command slighted, despised by your Enemies, pitied by your Friends, forsaken of good Fortune, and made subject unto our Effeminate Sex, which we will use by our power like Slaves. But when our Lord General who was recovered out of sickness, and all his Commanders about him heard this message, which was delivered in a full assembly, according as the Lady Vi∣ctoria had commanded the message should be, the men could not chose but smile at the women's high and mighty words, knowing they had all sweet and gentle dispositions and complying Natures, yet they were at a stand which to be pleased at most, as in hearing them disparage their Masculine Sex, or in advancing their own Female Sex by their self Commendations, but how∣soever so well pleased the men were with the women's gallant actions, that every man was proud that had but a Female acquaintance in the Female Army; but our Lord General was mightily taken with their bravadoes, and much mirth amongst the Commanders was about it; but when they were to advise what to do in the affairs of War, and the warring women, the General told them he made no question but that most men knew by expire∣ence that women were won by gentle persuasions and fair promises, and not by rigid actions or angry frowns, besides said he, all noble natures strive to assist the weakest in all lawful actions, and that he was no gallant man that submits not to a woman in all things that are honourable, and when he doth dissent it must be in a Courtly manner, and a Complemental behaviour and expression, for that women were Creatures made by nature, for men to love and admire, to protect and defend, to cherish and maintain, to seek and to sue to, and especially such women which have out-done all their Sex, which nature ever made before them; wherefore said he, it is fit to these wo∣men above all others we should yield our selves Prisoners, not only in love but in Arms; wherefore let us treat fairly with them, and give them their own
conditions. But in the mean time the Lady Victoria thought it best not to lose •y opportunity with talking out the time, wherefore she besieged a consi∣derable Fort, a place which was at it were the Key that unlocked the passage into the heart of the Enemies Kingdom, and at this siege they were when became away, but the General and his Council had sent a Messenger unto them, but what his message was I cannot give you an account.
Now my Lord is Entombed, our Lady will enanchor her self by his Ash.
It is strange so young and beautiful a Lady should bury her self from the World, and quit all the pleasures thereof, to live with dead Ashes.
A grieved Mind, Melancholy Thoughts, and an Oppressed Heart, considers not the Body, nor the World.
But yet I think it is an example that few of her Sex will imitate.
Because few of the Female Sex can truly Grieve or be Me∣lancholy.
No, it is that few of the Female Sex can truly and con∣stantly Love.
Pallas and Mercury at thy Death mourned,
So as to marble Statues here they are turned;
Mars sheaths his Sword, and begs of thee a room,
To 〈◊〉 all his courage in thy Tomb;
Hymen amazed stands, and is in doubt,
Thy Death his holy fire hath put out;
What various shape of Fortune thou did meet,
Thou scorn her frowns and kicks he with thy feet,
Now sound aloud the Trumpet of good Fame,
And blow abroad his everlasting name.
The Cardinal Virtues Pillars of thy fame,
Weep to see now each but an empty name
Only for Painters and for Carvers be,
When thy life sustained them more than they Thee;
Each Capital a sadder Virtue bears,
But for the Graces would be drowned in tears;
Faith strengthens Fortitude lest she should faint,
Hope comforts Prudence as her only Saint;
And Charity to Justice doth advance
To Counsel her, as Patience Temperance;
But woeful Counsellors they are each one,
Since grief for thy Death turned them all to stone.
Now I depose my self, and here lay down,
Titles, not Honour, with my richer Crown;
This Crimson Velvet Mantle I throw by,
There case and plenty in rich Ermins lie;
Off with this glittering Gown which once did bear
Ambition and fond pride lie you all there;
Bracelets and Pendants which I now do wear,
Here I divest my Arms and so each Ear;
Cut off these dangling Tresses once a crime,
Urging my Glass to look away my time;
Thus all these Worldly vanities I wave,
And bury them all in my Husbands grave.
Put on that pure and spotless garment white,
To show my chaster thoughts, my Souls delight;
Cord of Humility about my waste,
A Veil of obscure Mourning about me cast;
Here by this sadder Tomb shall be my Station,
And in this Book my holy Contemplation.
Farewell my Servants, farewell every one,
As you all love me pray leave me alone.
No dust shall on thy marble ever stay,
But with my sadder sighs isle blow 't away;
And the least spot that any Pillar bears,
Isle wash it clean with grief of dropping tears;
Sun fly this Hemisphaer, and feast my Eyes,
With Melancholy night, and never rise,
Nor by reflection, for all light I hate,
Therefore no Planet do illuminate;
The twinkling Stars that in cold nights are seen,
Clouds muster up and hide them as a Screen,
The Centrick fire raise vapours from the Earth,
Get and be Midwife for those fogs their birth;
Then chilling colds freeze up thy pores without,
That trembling Earth-quakes no where may get out;
And that our Mother Earth may nothing wear,
But Snow and Icicles to curl her hair;
And so Dame Nature Barren nothing bring,
Wishing a Chaos, since despairs a Spring;
Since all my joys are gone, what shall I do,
But with the whole World ruined with me too?
May it please your Excellence, our Lord General and the rest of the Commanders have sent you and your Heroics a Letter, desiring it may be read in a full Assembly.
One of you take the Letter and read it.
YOu Goddesses on Earth, who have the power and dominion over men, it is you we worship and adore, we pray and implore your better opinions of us, than to believe we are so unjust as to take the Victory out of your fair hands, or so vain-glo∣rios as to attribute it to our selves, or so ungrateful as not to acknowledge our lives and liberties from your valours, wisdoms, and good fortune, or so imprudent as to neglect your power, or so ill-bred as to pass by you without making our addresses, or so foolish as to go about any action without your knowledge, or so unmannerly as to do anything without your leave; wherefore we entreat you and pray you to believe that we have so much honour in us, as to admire your beauties, to be attentive to your dis∣courses, to do•e on your persons, to honour your virtues, to divulge your sweet gre∣ces, to praise your behaviours, to wait your commands, to obey your directions, to be proud of your favours, and we wear our lives only for your service, and believe we are not only taken Captives by your Beauties, but that we acknowledge we are bound as your Slaves by your valours: wherefore we all pray that you may not misinterpret our affections and care to your persons, in believing we sent you away because we were weary of you, which if so, it had been a sin unpardonable, but we sent you away for your safety, for Heaven knows your Departure was our Hell, and your Absence our Torments; but we confess our errors, and do humbly beg our pardons, for if you had accompanied us in our Battles, you had kept us safe, for had we fought in your presence, our Enemies had never overcome us, since we take courage from your Eyes, life from your smiles, and victory from your good wishes, and had become Conque∣rours by your encouragements, and so we might have triumphed in your favours, but hereafter your rules shall be our methods, by which we will govern all our actions, attending only wholly your directions, yet give us leave humbly to offer our advise as Subjects to their Princess if you think •it, we think it best to follow close the victory, lest that our Enemies recruit their forces, with a sufficient strength to beat us out of
what we have gained, or at least to hinder and oppose our entrance, and hopes of Conquering them, where if you will give us leave we will besiege and enter their Towns, and rase their Walls down to the ground, which harbour their disorders, of∣fending their Neighbours Kingdoms; yet we are not so ambitous as to desire to be Commanders, but to join our forces to yours, and to be your assistants, and as your Common Soldiers; but leaving all these affairs of War to your discretion, offering our selves to your service,
Noble Heroickesses, by your valours, and constant, and re∣solute proceedings, you have brought your Tyrants to be your Slaves; those that Commanded your absence, now humbly sue your presence, those that thought you a hindrance have felt your assistance, the time is well altered since we were sent to retreat back from the Masculine Army; and now no∣thing to be done in that Army without our advise, with an humble desire they may join their forces with ours: but gallant Heroickesses, by this you may perceive we were as ignorant of our selves as men were of us, think∣ing our selves shifdels, weak, and unprofitable Creatures, but by our actions of War we have proved our selves to be every way equal with men; for what we want of strength, we have supplied by industry, and had we not done what we have done, we should have lived in ignorance and slavery.
All the knowledge of our selves, the honour of renown, the freedom from slavery, and the submission of men, we ac∣knowledge from you; for you advised us, counselled us, instructed us, and encouraged us to those actions of War: wherefore to you we owe our thanks, and to you we give our thanks.
What answer will you return to the Masculine Army?
What answer you will think best.
We shall not need to write back an answer, for this Mes∣senger may deliver it by word of mouth; wherefore Sir pray remember us to your General and his Commanders, and tell them, that we are willing upon their submissions to be friends, and that we have not neglected our good Fortune, for we have laid siege to so considerable a Fort, which if ta∣ken, may give an easy passage into the Kingdom, which Fort we will de∣liver to their forces when they come, that they may have the honour of ta∣king it; for tell them, we have got honour enough in the Battle we fought, and victory we did win.
We are bound to curse you Monsieur Gravity, for retarding our visits to the Widows, for I told you we should come too late if we did not go before their Husbands were buried
But I do not hear they have made a promise to marry any as yet.
That's all one unto us, but the noblest, youngest, richest, and fairest VVidow is gone; for though she is not promised or married, yet she is incloistered, and that is worse than marriage; for if she had been married there might have been some hopes her Husband would have died, or been killed, or some ways or other Death would have found to have taken him away.
Let us comfort our selves with hopes, that it is but a Ladies humour, which she will be soon weary of, for when her Melan∣choly •it is over, she will come forth of her Cloister, and be fonder to marry than if she had never gone in.
Well, since she is gone, let us assault the other.
What, the old woman that hath never a Tooth in her head?
Why, she is rich, and she will kiss the softer for ha∣avenge no Bones in her mouth.
The Devil shall kiss her before I will; besides, an old woman is thought a Witch.
Pish, that is because they are grown ill-favoured with Age, and all young people think whatsoever is ill-favoured belongs to the Devil.
An ancient man is a comely sight, being grave and wise by experience, and what he hath lost in his person, he hath gained in his understanding; besides, beauty in men looks as unhandsome as age in wo∣men, as being effeminate; but an old woman looks like the picture of En∣vi, with hollow Eyes, fallen Checks, lank Sides, black pale Complexion, and more Wrinkles than time hath Minutes.
Nay by your favour, some old women look like the full Moon, with a red, swelled, great, broad face, and their Bodies like as a spungy Cloud, thick and gross, like our fat Hostess.
Gentlemen, why do you rail against ancient women so much, since those that are wise will never marry such Boys as you?
It is to be observed, that always old Girls match themselves with young Boys.
None but Fools will do so.
Why did you or any man else ever know a wise old woman, or a chaste young woman in their lives? for the one dotes with Age, the other is corrupted with Flattery, which is a Bawd to self-conceit.
Grant it be so, yet it is better to marry an old doting Fool, than a wanton young Fille.
For my part, I think now it is the best way to marry none, since Madam Iantil is gone, but to live like the Lacedaemonians, all in Common.
I am of another opinion, wherefore if you will go along with me to the old VVidow Madam Passionate, and help to Count∣nonce my Suit, I shall take it as an act of Friendship.
Come, we will be thy Pillars to support thee.
What, doth thy Lady resolve to live an Anchorite?
I think so.
How doth she pass away her time in her solitary Self?
Why, as soon as she rises she goes to my Lords Tomb, and says her Prayers, then she returns and eats some little Breakfast, as a Crust of Bread and a Draught of Water, then she goes to her Gallery and walks and Contemplates all the Forenoon, then about twelve a Clock at Noon she goes to the Tomb again and says more Prayers, then returns and eats a small Dinner of some Spoon-meats, and most of the Afternoon she sits by the Tomb and reads, or walks in the Cloister, and views the Pictures of my Lord that are placed upon the Walls, then in the Evening she says her Evening Prayers at the Tomb, and eats some light Supper, and then prays at the Tomb before she goes to Bed, and at Midnight she rises and takes a white waxen Torch lighted in her hand, and goes to the Tomb to pray, and then returns to Bed.
Faith she prays often enough in the day, she shall not need to pray at Midnight; but why doth she rise just at Midnight?
I know not, unless she is of that opinion which some have been of, which is that the Souls or Spirits of the dead rise at that hour out of their Graves and Tombs, to visit the face of the Earth, and perhaps my Lady watches or hopes to converse by that means with my Lords Ghost: for since she cannot converse with him living, she desires to converse with him dead, or otherwise she would not spend most of her time at this Tomb as she doth; but how doth thy Lady spend her time now?
Faith as a Lady should do, with nourishing her Body with good hear•y meats and drink. And though my Lady doth not pray at Mid∣night, yet she converses with Spirits at that time of Night.
What Spirits?
Marry Spirits distilled from Wine and other Cordials, which she drinks when she wakes, which is at Midnight; but do you watch fast and pray as thy Lady doth?
No truly, for I feed with the rest of my Ladies Servants, which live within the House without the Cloister, and they eat and drink more liberally.
Sir, we come to kiss the hands of the Lady Passio∣nate, if you please to inform your Lady of us.
I shall, if it please you to enter into another Room.
Madam, there are three Gentlemen come to visit you, de∣siring you would give them leave to kiss your hands.
Shut down the lid of the Seller of Strong-waters, and rid away the loose things that lie about, that my Chamber may appear in some order.
Bring in those Gentlemen?
I marry Sir, here is a comfortable smell indeed.
Faith the smell of these Spirits overcomes my Spirits, for I am ready to swooned.
Pray Gentlemen sit down.
Truly I have had so great a wind in my Stomach as it hath troubled me very much.
Which to express the better, she rasps at every word to make a full stop.
Perchance Madam you have eaten some meat that disgests not well.
A Toad.
No, truly I cannot gess what should cause it, unless it be an old pippin, and that is accounted a great restorative.
But I believe it is the drugs of my Sorrow which stick in my Stomach: for I have grieved mightily for my dead Husband rest his Soul; he was a good Man, and as kind a Husband as ever woman had.
But the destinies Madam are not to be controlled, Death seizes on all, be it early or late; wherefore every one is to make their life as happy as they can; since life is so short; and in order to that, you should choose a new Companion to live withal; wherefore you must marry again.
It is true, the Destinies are not to be controlled as you say, wherefore if my Destiny be to marry, I shall marry, or else I shall dye a Widow.
She will lay the fault of her second Marriage on Destiny, as many the like foolish actions are laid to Destinies charge, which she was never guilty of.
If I should gess at your destiny, I should judge you will marry again, by the quickness of your Eyes which are fair and lovely.
O Sir you flatter me.
He be sworn that he doth.
But my Eyes were good, as I have been told, both by my Glass and Friends, when I was young, but now my face is in the Autumal.
Nay faith, it is in the midst of Winter.
But now you talk of Eyes, that young Gentleman's Eyes (points to Compagnion) do so resemble my Husbands as I can scarce look off from them, they have a good Aspect.
I am glad they have an influence upon your Ladyship.
By my faith wittily answered, I dare say he is a notable youth.
Sir, for resemblance of him which is dead, I shall desire your continued Acquaintance.
She woos me with her Husbands dead skull.
I shall render my Service to your Ladyship.
Those young youths I perceive will be my ruin if not prevented. Madam, will your Ladyship honour me so much as to give me the private hearing of a few words.
Yes Sir.
Madam, although I am not such a one as I could wish my self for your sake, yet I am a Gentleman, and what I want in person or estate, my affection, respect, and tender regard to your person, worth, and merit shall make good; besides Madam, my years suiting to your Lady∣ships will make the better agreement in marriage.
Sir you must excuse me; for though you merit a better wife than I, yet I cannot answer your affections; wherefore I desire you will desist in your Suit, for I am resolved, if I do marry, to please my fancy.
If your Ladyship cannot love me, Heaven forbid I should marry you; wherefore I wish your Ladyship such a Husband as you can fancy best, and love most.
Madam your most humble Servant.
Where is our Coach?
Call the Coach to the Door?
Sir, pray give me leave to speak a word or two with you.
As many as you please.
Sir, my Lady desires your Company to morrow to Dinner, but she desires you will come alone.
Pray give your Lady thanks for her favours, and tell her if I can possibly I will wait on her Ladyship.
Now what encouragement have you from the old Lady?
Faith so much as I am ashamed of it, for she invites me to come alone.
On my life if thou wilt not woo her, she will woo thee.
Like enough; for there is nothing so impudent as an old woman, they will put a young man be he never so deboist out of Countenance.
But faith consider of it, for she is rich.
So is the Devil, as Poets say, Pluto the God of riches.
I grant it, and is not he best served? for every one bows with respect, nay worships and adores riches, and they have reason so to do, since all are miserable that have it not, for Poverty is a torment beyōd all suf∣ferance, which causes many to hang themselves, either in the Chain of Info∣my, or in a Hempen rope, or to do act; against the strict Laws of a Common∣wealth which is to commit self-murther; besides, Poverty is the Slave and drug, the scorn and reproach of the World, &amp; it makes all younger Brothers Sherks, and mere Cheats, whereas this old Ladies riches will not only give you an honest mind, and create noble thoughts, but will give you an honourable reputation in the World: for every one will think you Wise although you were a Fool, Valiant although you were a Coward, and you shall have the first offers of all Offices, and all Officers will be at you devoti∣on, they will attend you as Slaves, the Lawyers will plead on your side, and Judges will give sentence according as you desire, Courtiers will flatter you, and Divines will pray for you in their Pulpits, and if your old Lady die, and leave you her wealth, you shall have all the young beautiful Virgins in the Kingdom gather to that City, Town, or Village where you live, omitting no Art that may prefer them to your affection.
You say well, and I could approve of your Counsel, if she would die soon after I had married her.
Why, put the case she should live a great while, as the truth is old women are tough, and endure long, yet you will have her Estate to please your self withal, which Estate will buy you fine Horses, great Coaches, maintain Servants and great Retinues to follow you.
But she is so devilish old.
Why, let her keep her Age to her self, whilst you keep a young Mistress to your self, and it is better to have an old Wife that will look after your Family, and be careful and watchful therein, and a young Mistress, than a young Wife, which will be a Tyrannical Mistress, which will look after nothing but Vanities, and love Servants, whilst you poor wretch look like a contented Cuckold, and so out of Countenance as you dare not show your face, whilst she spends your Estate running about with every vain idle fellow to Plays, Masks, Balls, Exchanges, Taverns, or meets at a pri∣vate Friends private Lodging, also making great Feasts and Entertainments, where after Dinner and Supper, there must be gaming at Cards and Dice; where for her honour, or at least seeming so, to lose five hundred or a thou∣sand pounds away, and when they rise with or from their losses, singing with a feigned voice, as if it were a trifle not to be considered or consider∣ble, thus if you marry an old and rich Lady you may live and spend her Estate, but if you marry for youth and beauty, your wife will live and spend your Estate; besides, the Husband of an old Lady lives like the great Turk, having a Seraglio, but marrying a young wife you live like a Prisoner never durst show your head.
He gives you good Counsel, and let me advise you to go to this Lady as she hath invited you, for I perceive she hath a young Tooth in her old head by refusing me, and there is none so fit to pull it out as you are, wherefore go.
Well Gentlemen, I will try if my Reason and your Counsel can prevail in my choice.
Welcome sad thoughts that's heaped up without measure,
They're joys to me and wealthy Sons of treasure;
Were all my breath turned into sighs it would ease me,
And showrs of tears to bath my griefs would please me;
Then every groan so kind to take my part,
To vent some sorrows still thus from my heart;
But there's no Vacuum, O my heart is full,
As it vents sorrows new griefs in doth pull;
Is there no comfort left upon the Earth?
Let me consider Vegetable birth;
The new born virgin Lily of the day,
In a few hours dyes, withers away;
And all the odoriferous flowers that's sweet,
Breath but a while, and then with Death do meet;
The stouter Oak at last doth yield, and must
Cast his rough skin and crumble all to dust;
But what do Sensitives? alas they be,
Beasts, Birds and flesh to die as well as we;
And harder minerals though longer stay
Here for a time, yet at the last decay,
And dye as all things else that's in this World,
For into Deaths Arms every thing is hurled;
Alas poor man you're in the worst Estate,
Thou die as these, yet an unhappier fate;
Thy life's but trouble still of numerous passions,
Torments thy self in many various fashions;
Condemned thou art to vexing thoughts within;
When Beasts both live and dye without a sin;
O happy Beasts than grazing look no higher,
Or are tormented with thoughts Flaming fire;
Thus by thy self and others still annoid,
And made a purpose but to be destroyed
Poor Man.
What news Sir of our Armies abroad?
Why Sir thus, in the time of our Masculine Armies re∣cruiting, the Female Army had taken the Fort they besieged, where upon the taking of that Fort, many considerable Towns and strong holds surrendered, and submitted to the Female Army; whereupon the Lady Victoria sent to her Husband to bring his Army, when the General and all the Masculine Army came to the Female Army, much mirth and jesting there was be∣twixt the Heroics and Heroickesses, and so well they did agree, as the Fe∣male Army feasted the Masculine Army, and then gave the possession of the surrendered Towns to the Lord General, and the Lady Victoria, and all her Army kept themselves in and about the Fort, laying all their victorious spoils therein, and whilst the Masculine Army is gone to Conquer the King∣dome of Faction, they stay there upon the Frontiers, passing their time in Heroic sports, as hunting the Stags, wild Boars, and the like, and those that have the good Fortune to kill the Chase, is brought to the Fort and Trenches in Triumph, and is Queen until another Chase is killed; but we hear the Masculine Army goes on with victorious success.
I am very glad to hear it.
O Doll, I hear thy Lady is married, and not only married, but she hath married a very young man, one that might be her Grand-Son, or Son at least.
Yes, yes, my Lady doth not intend to live with the dead as your Lady doth, but to have the Company and pleasure of that which hath most life, which is a young man.
Her marriage was very sudden.
So are all inconsiderated marriages, but happy is the wooing that is not long a doing.
If I had been your Lady, I would have prolonged the time of my wooing, for the wooing time is the happiest time.
Yes, if she had been as young as you or your Lady, but time bids my Lady make haste.
Do you hear the news.
What news?
Why the news is that all the Kingdom of Faction hath submit∣ted to the Kingdom of Reformation, and that the Armies are return∣ing home.
I am glad of it.
O unfortunate woman that I am, I was rich, and lived in plenty, none to control me, I was Mistress of my self, Estate and Family, all my Servants obeyed me, none durst contradict me, but all flat∣red me, filling my Ears with praises, my Eyes with their humble bow; and respectful behaviours, devising delightful sports to entertain my time, making delicious meats to please my palate, sought out the most comfort∣ble drinks to strengthen and increase my Spirits, thus did I live luxuriously, but now I am made a Slave, and in my old Age which requires rest and peace, which now Heaven knows I have but little of, for the minstrels keep me waking, which play whilst my Husband and his Whores dance, and he is not only contented to live riotously with my Estate, but sits amongst his Wenches and rails on me, or else comes and scoffs at me to my face; be∣sides, all my Servants slight and neglect me; following those that com∣mand the purse, for this idle young fellow which I have married first seized on all my goods, then let Leases for many lives out of my Lands, for which he had great fines, and now he cuts down all my Woods, and sells all my Lands of Inheritance, which I foolishly and fondly delivered by deed of gift, the first day I married, divesting my self of all power, which power had I kept in my own hands I might have been used better, whereas now
when he comes home drunk, he swears and storms, and kiks me out of my warm Bed, and makes me sit shivering and shaking in the Cold, whilst my Maid takes my place; but I find I cannot live long, for age and disorders bring weakness and sickness, and weakness and sickness bring Death, wherefore my marriage Bed is like to prove my grave, whilst my Husbands Curses are my passing Bell, hay ho.
I hear the Army is returning home.
Yes, for they are returned as far back as to the Effemi∣nate Army, and all the Masculine Commanders have presented all the Fe∣male Commanders with their spoils got in the Kingdom of Faction, as a tribute to their heroical acts, and due for their assistance, and safety of their lives and Country.
And do not you hear what privileges and honours the King and his Counsel hath resolved and agreed upon to be given to the Female Army, and the honours particularly to be given the Lady Victoria?
No.
Why then I will tell you some, the Lady Victoria shall be brought through the City in triumph, which is a great honour, for never any one makes triumphs in a Monarchy but the King himself• then that there shall be a blank for the Female Army to write their desires and demands; also there is an Armour of gold and a Sword a making, the hilt being set with Diamonds, and a Chariot all gilt and embroidered to be presented to the Lady Victoria, and the City is making great preparation against her arrival.
Certainly she is a Lady that deserves as much as can be given either from Kings, States, or Poets.
Where is my Secretary?
Here Madam.
Read the Will I cause you to write down.
I Jantil the Widow of Seigneur Valeroso, do here make a free gift of all these following.
Item, All my Husbands Horses and Saddels and whatsoever belongs to those Horses, with all his Arms, Pikes, Guns, Drums, Trumpets, Colours, Waggous, Coaches, Tents, and all he had belonging to the War, to be distributed amongst his Officers of War, according to each degree, I freely give.
Item, All his Library of Books I give to that College he was a Pupil in when he was at the University.
Item, To all his Servants I give the sum of their yearly wages to be yearly paid them during their lives.
Item, I give two hundred pounds a year pension to his Chaplin Doctor Educature during his life.
Item, I give a hundred pound a year pension to his Steward during his life.
Item, I give fifty pound a year pension to his Secretary during his life.
Item, I give a hundred pound per annum, for the use and repair of this Tomb of my dead Husbands.
Item, I give a thousand pounds a year to maintain ten religious persons to live in this place or House by this Tomb.
Item, I give three thousand pounds to enlarge the House, and three thousand pounds more to build a Chapel by my Husbands Tomb.
Item, Two hundred pounds a year I give for the use and repair of the House and Chapel.
Item, I give my Maid Nil Careless a thousand pound to live a single life.
Item, I give the rest of my Estate which was left me by my Husband Seigneur Valeroso to the next of his name.
So it is well
O Death hath shook me kindly by the hand,
To bid me welcome to the silent grave;
It is dead and nuns sweet Death how thou doest court me,
O let me clap thy fallen Cheeks with joy,
And kiss the Emblem of what once was lips,
Thy hollow Eyes I am in love withal,
And thy balled head beyond youths best curled hair,
Prithee embrace me in thy colder Arms,
And hug me there to sit me for thy Mansion;
Then bid our Neighbour worms to feast with us,
Thus to rejoice upon my holy day;
But thou art sylow, I prithee hasten Death,
And linger not my hopes thus with thy stay,
It is not thy fault thou say, but fearful nature
That hinders thus Deaths progress in his way;
Oh foolish nature thinks thou can withstand,
Deaths Conquering and inevitable hand;
Let me have Music for divertisement,
This is my Mask, Deaths Ball, my Soul to dance
Out of her frail and fleshly prison here;
Oh could I now dissolve and melt, I long
To free my Soul in Slumbers with a Song;
In soft and quiet sleep here as I lie,
Steal gently out O Soul, and let me die.
O You Gods pure Angels send her,
Here about her to attend her;
Let them wait and here condole,
Till receive her spotless Soul;
So Serene it is and fair,
It will sweeten all the Air;
You this holy wonder hears,
With the Music of the spheres;
Her Souls journey in a trice,
You'll bring safe to Paradise;
And rejoice the Saints that say,
She makes Heavens Holy-day.
Death hath not finished yet his work, h'is slow,
But he is sure, for he will do it at last;
Turn me to my dear Lord, that I may breath
My last words unto him, my dear,
Our marriage joined our flesh and bone,
Contracted by those holy words made one;
But by our Loves we joined each others heart,
And vowed that death should never us depart;
Now death doth marry us, since now we must,
Ashes to ashes be mingling our dust,
And our joyed Souls in Heaven married then,
When our frail bodies rise, we'll wed again;
And now I am joyed to lie by thy loved side,
My Soul with thy Soul shall in Heaven reside.
For that is all my
She is dead; she is dead, the body hence convey,
And to our Mistress our last rights we'll pay.
Where shall we stand to see this triumphing?
I think Neighbour this is the best place.
We shall be mightily crowded there.
For my part I will stand here, and my Apprentice Na∣thaniel shall stand by me, and keep off the crowd from crowding me.
Truly Mistress that is more than I am able to do.
Well Neighbour if you be resolved to stand here, we will keep you Company. Timothy stand by me.
If you stand here Mistress the Squibs will run under your Clothes.
No matter Timothy, let them run where they will.
I hope Neighbour none will stand before us, for I would not but see this Lady Victoria for any thing, for they say she hath brought Articles for all women to have as many Husbands as they will, and all Trades-mens Wives shall have as many Apprentices as they will.
The Gods bless her for it.
She is coming, she is coming.
Stand up close, make way.
The Lady Victoria was adorned after this manner; she had a Coat on all embroidered with silver and gold, which Coat reached no further than the Calves of her legs, and on her legs and feet she had Buskins and Sandals embroidered suitable to her Coat; on her head she had a Wreath or Garland of Laurel, and her hair curled and loosely flowing; in her hand a Crystal Bolt headed with gold at each end, and after the Chariot marched all her Female Officers with Laurel Branches in their hands, and after them the inferior she Soldiers, then going through the Stage, as through the City, and so entering again, where on the midst of the Stage as if it were the midst of the City, the Magistrates meet her, so her Chariot makes a stand, and one as the Recorder speaks a Speech to her.
VIctorious Lady, you have brought Peace Safety and Conquest to this Kingdom by your prudent conduct and valiant actions, which never any of your Sex in this Kingdom did before you. Wherefore our Graci∣os King is pleased to give you that which was never granted nor given to any before, which is to make you Triumphant, for no triumph is ever made in Monarchies, but by the Kings thereof; besides our Gracious King hath caused an act to be made and granted to all your Sex, which Act I have order to declare, as
First, That all women shall he••after in this Kingdom be Mistress in their own Houses and Families.
Secondly, They shall sit at the upper end of the Table above their Husbands.
Thirdly, That they shall keep the purse.
Fourthly, They shall order their Servants, turning from, or taking into their service what number they will, placing them how they will, and ordering them how they will, and giving them what wages they will or think fit.
Fiftly, They shall buy in what Provisions they will.
Sixtly, All the Jewels, Plate, and Household Furniture they shall claim as their own, and order them as they think good.
Seventhly, They shall wear what fashioned Clothes they will.
Eightly, They shall go abroad when they will, without control, or go∣avenge of any account thereof.
Ninthly, They shall eat when they will, and of what they will, and as much as they will, and as often as they will.
Tenthly, They shall go to Plays, Masks, Balls, Churchings, Christenings, Preachings, whenever they will, and as fine and bravely attired as they will.
Lastly, That they shall be of their Husbands Counsel.
AS for you most gallant Lady, the King hath caused to be enacted, that
First, All Poets shall strive to set forth your praise.
Secondly, That all your gallant acts shall be recorded in story, and put in the chief Library of the Kingdom.
Thirdly, That your Arms you fought in, shall be set in the Kings Armoury.
Fourthly, That you shall always wear a Laurel Garland.
Fiftly, You shall have place next to the Kings Children.
Sixtly, That all those women that have committed such faults as is a dishonour to the Female Sex, shall be more severely punished than heretofore, in not following your exemplary virtues, and all those that have followed your example shall have respective honour done to them by the State.
Seventhly and lastly, Your figure shall be cast in Brass, and then set in the midst of the City armed as it was in the day of Battle.
Worthy Sir, the honour and privileges my Gracious King and Sovereign hath bestowed upon me, is beyond my merit.
OUr gracious King hath caused to be enacted, as
First, All the Chief Female Commanders shall have place, as every Lords Wife shall take place of an Earls Wife that hath not been a Soldier in the Army; every Knights Wi•e before a Barons Wife that hath not been a Soldier in the Are∣my; an Esquires Wife before a Knights Wife; a Doctors Wife before an Esquires Wife that hath not been Soldiers in the Army; a Citizens Wife before a Doctors Wife; a Yeomans Wife before a Citizens Wife that hath not been a Soldier in the Army; and all Trades-mens Wives that have been Soldiers in the Army shall be free in all the Corporations in this Kingdom, these Acts during their lives, and all the Chief Commanders shall be presented according to their quality and merit.
O Nil, I hear thy Lady is dead, and hath left thee a thou∣sand pound.
What doest thou weep for joy of thy thousand pound, or for grief of thy Ladies Death?
I wish my Lady had lived, although I had begged all my life.
I am not of your mind, I had rather live well my self, as to live in plenty, than to live poor for the life of any body, and if upon that condition my Lady would leave me a thousand pound, I care not if she died to morrow; but my young Master hath robbed me of all: but Nil, for all thou art left a thousand pound, it is upon such a condition, as for my part, had it been to me, I should not thank the giver, for they say it is given thee upon condition to live a single life.
Truly I have seen so much sorrow in my Lady, and so much folly in your Lady concerning Husbands, that had not my Lady in∣joined me to live a single life, I would never have married; wherefore my Ladies generosity did not only provide for my bodily life, and for my plen∣tifull living, but provided for the tranquillity of my mind, for which I am trebly obliged to reverence her memory.
The Lady Victoria hath been at Court, and hath had public Audience.
Yes, and the Lady Victoria and her she Officers and Commanders have distributed all their spoils got in these Wars amongst the Common she Soldiers.
All the Ladies that went not with the Army look most pitti∣fully out of Countenance.
Yes, and they are much troubled that the Heroics shall take place.
The Lord General seems to be very proud of his Lady, methinks he looks upon her with a most pleased Eye.
He hath reason, for never man had so gallant and noble a Lady, not more virtuous and loving a Wife than the Lord General hath.

NOble Spectators, this play that you'll see,
Is taken out of Britains History;
It is not pleasant, nor yields much delight,
But it did serve the Poetress to write;
She bids me tell you, she was glad to take
Any dull plot, so she a play could make,
Her vacant idle time for to employ;
For she loves writing more than Company;
But if it pleases not your Eyes or sight,
She doth not care, since it pleased her to write;
For she endeavours, tries all that she may
To please her self in every honest way;
Wherefore a praise, or yet applause from you,
She expects not, nor challenges as her due.
DEar Madam, why doth your Highness weep?
As fear frights tears from the Eyes, so grief doth send them forth.
Why should your Highness grieve?
Have I not cause, when I am married to a person which doth not love, but rather hate me?
Certainly he hath reason to love you, and he were worse than a Devil if he should hate you; as first to love you for your virtue and sweet disposition; next for the honour, dignity, and Kingdom, he hath got by his marring you: for he hath no right to the Dukedom but by your High∣nos, and by your Highness he is become an absolute Prince, and enjoys a rich Kingdom.
But he hath taken the power from me, and strives to disposess of me of my right.
He cannot, the Kingdom will never suffer him, for your title is so just, as he can make no pretence to disposess your Highness from your Princely Throne.
But I being his Wife, he takes the power of a Hus∣band, and by that power, the power of my Kingdom, and those that have the power can frame their titles as they please, none dare oppose them.
The truth is, Madam, that might overcomes right.
The Factions and divisions that are in this Kingdom will be a means to deliver it into the power of the Enemy.
This Duke is young, wild, deboist and inconstant, wherefore there is but little hopes it should be better governed.
But the Duchess who is the true owner of it, is discreet, wise, and virtuous, and having more years than he, she might help to rule and or∣der state affairs.
But neither her discretion, wisdom, nor virtue hath power, for marriage hath enthralled her, for she is become her Husbands Slave, who ought to be his Sovereign, but he laughs and doth despise her, because she is somewhat elder than himself.
Heaven will revenge her wrongs.
Have you been with the Lady I sent you to?
Yes.
And doth she listen to Loves Suit?
She seems well pleased to hear her Beauty praised, but will not hear of Amorous embraces as yet.
But it is a good Omen when as a Lady will nimblingly bite at a bait of flattery; but did you see her Husband?
No Sir.
Well, you must go again, and present her with a Letter, and a present from me; for Ladies must be plied though they deny, yet most do yield upon a treaty, they cannot long hold out loves fierce assaults.
Indeed the Female Sex is tender and weak, although they are delicate and sweet.
They are false and oft betray themselves.
O Madam, Madam, news is come that the Enemy hath got into the heart of the Kingdom; wherefore sweet Lady fly, for they will possess themselves of this City soon.
I will not fly, for I cannot meet a worse Enemy than the Duke himself, should worse than Mankind Conquer it; but I wish my Sister were safe.
The young Princess I hear is fled to the Dukes Brother.
I am glad of it, for he is discreetly temperate, al∣though his Brother is not.
Sir, what will your Highness do?
I will go and oppose the Enemy.
Alas Sir you have no forces to oppose them withal, you may go to be destroyed, but not to destroy; wherefore you with your small forces had better fly than fight.
Whither shall I go?
To any Prince that will receive you into pay, by which you may maintain your self, and live with some respect and same abroad, though you have lost your Kingdom; whereas if you stay, you will lose your self and Kingdom too.
Your Counsel I will take.
But what will your Highness do with your Duchess?
Let her do what she will with her self, I care not now, for since her Kingdom is lost, I have no use of her.
Not as concerning the Kingdom Sir, but yet she is your Highnesses Wife, and as a Husband you ought to regard her.
She will follow me, for Wives stick so close to their Husbands as they cannot be shaken off.
Pray Madam do not marry so much below your self.
Why? what matter whom I marry, since I can cre∣ate my Husband to Honour.
But Madam, that Honour will do him no good, nor will it take off your disgrace; for none will give your Husband, if he be an inferior person, the Place and Respect that is due to Great Princes Titles.
No, but he shall take Place, and my Servants shall give him the Respect and Homage that is due to great Titles: For I will make him a Prince; and who dare call him any other, but Prince?
There is none will call him Prince, unless your own Servants; and none will give him Place, that are above the degree of his Birth: no, nor he durst not take it of Gallant Noble Men; for if he offers thereat, they will beat him back, and force him to give way, and to be only a Prince in his own House, and not abroad, is no better than to be a Farmer, nay, a Cobbler, or a Tailor, or any the like are Kings in their own Houses, although they be but thatched, if they have but a Servant subject, or Subject Ser∣vant.
Well, say what you will, I will make him a Prince.
Sir, doth not your Highness hear that your Duchess is gone with your Enemies into the Country?
Yes, and though I might curse my Enemies for dispossessing me of the Kingdom I enjoyed, yet I give them thanks for carrying my Wife away with them: for now I have more room and liberty to Woo and Court my Mistress.
Sir, the Lady Beauties Husband's dead.
So I perceive Fortune will be my Friend some ways, although she is my Foe other ways: for she will Crown me with Love, although she uncrowns me with Power: wherefore return presently back to my Mistress, and tell her, that now her Husband is dead, and my Wife gone into another Country, We may marry.
But your Highness cannot marry, as long as the Duchess is alive.
I mean to be like the Great Turk, have many VVives.
Why, the Great Turk hath but one chief Wife, the rest are but as Concubines: for only the Sons of that chief Queen shall be Successors to the Emperor, unless she hath none; neither can his other Children inherit,
unless he be Right and Lawful Emperor: So, that unless your Highness had been Duke by Inheritance, as an Inhereditary Duke, no Children, by any other Lady, can be Inheritors, nor indeed Princes, unless they were begot on the Right Owner to that Title.
Well, since I have no Power, but only an empty Title, I cannot disadvantage my self, or children: for I have no children as yet, and I have neither Power, nor Kingdom now: Wherefore, if I can enjoy her upon these terms, as the name of Wife, it will be well.
But Sir, this part of the World allows but of one wife, wherefore if you should marry this Lady, the Clergy will excommunicate you, as an Adulterer, and the Lady, as an Adulteress, out of the Church.
I had rather be in the Ladies bed, than in the Church: But I have money, although I have lost my Dukedom, and that will help me.
But not make your Marriage lawful.
I care not; for if the marrying, and the name of wife will satisfy the Lady, I care not whether it be Good or Bad, Lawful or unlawful, Wife or Concubine, it is all one to me; for I willl marry a hundred women, if they will marry me, and let me lye with them.
Your Highness bears afflictions more courageously than I thought your Highness would have done.
Truly, I find I am more happy since I am amongst my Enemies (if they may be termed so) than I was in my own Country with an unkind Husband: for they allow me a Noble and Princely Pension: and I live Free, Easily and Peaceably, which I did not before.
I hear your Sister is married to the Dukes Brother.
I wish she may be more happy with her Husband, than I have been with mine.
If they have Children, and your Highness none, they will be Heirs to the Dukedom.
They will so, but there is no Dukedom now to heir, it is made now a Province.
But times may change.
Now you are an absolute Duchess, you must carry your self in State, and live Magnificently, like as an Absolute Princess as you are.
Yes, but it is a great affliction for the Duke and I to be banished, and driven out of our Kingdom.
Alas Madam, great Princes have many times great misfortunes; but you must bear your misfortunes with a Princely magnaminity.
But if I have Children, alas what shall they do?
But those that did never enjoy the possession, cannot rapine, nor grieve for the loss.
You say true.
Pray Madam do not marry so meanly, for you cannot entitle him a Prince.
Well, well, say what you will, I will make him a Prince; for why may not I as well make my Husband lawfully a Prince, as well as the Duke of Inconstancy makes the Lady Beauty a Duchess, and yet hath another Wife?
In truth it will be just like a poor Beggar Woman in Angle. being mad she said she was Queen Elizabeth of Angle., and all the Boys, Girls, and Common people would run after her, and call her Queen Elizabeth in sport and jest; the like was a poor mad Beggar Man in France, which said he was King Henry the 4th. of France; but the only difference will be, that you and the Comical Duchess have means and wealth enough to live in Principy, and they had none, but were so poor they were forced to beg, so could not Act their parts.
You are a bold rude wench, therefore get you out of my service.
Truly I would not stay in it if I might, for I should be ashamed.
Madam, doth your Highness here of the Apocriphal Duchess?
What Apocriphal Duchess?
Why the Duke hath married another Lady.
That he cannot, until I dye, it is true a Mistress may take the name of a Wife, but cannot possess the right of a Wife.
She will be as a Duchess in a Play, she will only act the part of greatness.
Indeed most Stage-Players are Courtesans.
And most Courtesans are good Actors.
I make no question but she will now have enough Spectators.
But I hope they will hiss her from off the Stage.
Have I married you who was a mean fellow, and have not I made you a Prince, and you to deny to pay my Debts?
But I thought you would have rather enriched me, than have made me poorer than I was.
Have I not enriched you with Titles? do not all my Ser∣vents call you Prince? and do not all the Trades-men where we buy all our Commodities, when they come to our Palace do the same, call you Prince, and doe you reverence?
Yes for hopes of gain.
I am sure you will gain little reputation or respect if you carry your self so sneakingly as you do, whereas you should carry your self like a Prince, bravely.
Put when all our money is gone we shall be but poor Princes: I had better have keep to my Trade than to have been a Prince, where if I had I should have been rich, now I shall be a Beggar.
You are so mean a fellow as you cannot be sensible of the honour and dignity I have bestowed upon you.
All the great Ladies are so envious at your Highness, as there will none of them come near you.
I like the Company of Bourgers Wives better, for they are my Slaves.
Yes Madam, but your Highness is forced I think to present them with some presents now and then; for the World is so wicked, that they will not give true honour it's due, unless they are bribed.
You say true, but men will give Ladies their due right.
Yes, men are more generous and bountiful to Ladies; but yet they must be bribed with hopes of obtaining some favours, other∣ways, I fear me they would be as reserved, and retired from your High∣noses Court as the great Ladies are.
I wonder they should, I being an absolute Princess.
Yes, but since your Titles, Rights and Marriage is re∣nounced against, they are not so civil, dutiful, and obedient as they were, not considering as they ought to do, that right cannot be renounced against.
But her Highness doth show them their error, and that she shows them it cannot be taken from her; for she keeps the same State she did, and is as Merry, Gay and Frolic, to let the World see, she understands her own Greatness best.
But yet there are but few of any Nation, but the inferior sort, that come to her Highness Court, unless it be the Red Oker Knights and Ladies, and if it were not for them, this Court would be empty.
Indeed I am obliged to them more than any other Na∣tion, for they give me all the due Respects and Homage to my Great∣nos; for which I love that Nation very well.
You have reason, but I do observe there is nothing doth keep up a Court more than Dancing, and several sorts and kinds of merry pastime; for wheresoever there is Dancing and Sport, Company will flock together.
You say true.
I find my self full of pain; I believe I shall fall in La∣bore.
I hope then we shall have a young Prince, or Princess soon.
I Saw Prince Shadow.
What Prince is he?
Why he is the Creating Princess's Husband, who made him a Prince.
I thought no women could give Title to their Husbands, unless they had been Sovereigns.
O yes, all women can give their Husbands Titles, if they please.
What Title?
Why the title of Cuckolds.
Indeed most women do magnify their Husbands by those Ti∣tles.
But let me tell you, that those women that have Inheritary Ho∣nurse, although not Sovereigns, may endue their Husbands with the same Honour: but it is not generally so; but his Children begot on her are in∣duet, and not the Husband, yet some Husbands are. As for Example; a Lord, Vicoun•, Earl, Marquess, Duke, King, or Emperor, if the Honour, as Title, goes to the Female, for default of a Male, in some Nations their Husbands are endued with their Titles, but not commonly known to be so in England; as a Wife with her Husband, which is only during life, and not Inhereditary: but if their Titles are only during life, and not Inhereditary, it cannot derive to another, that i• not an Successor• for Inhereditary Ho∣nor go like Entailed Lands, it goes only to the next Heir; but those that are the dignified, are like those that have Joynters, or Annuitles for life; so when a Husband receives a Dignity from a Wife, or a Wife from a Husband, it is but so much Honour for life.
But if they have Children, those Children inherit the Ho∣nor.
Yes, as having a right from that Parent that is the Digni∣fire, but if there be none of the line of the Dignifyer, the Honour dies, nei∣there is the root of the Honour left to any more than one: for though the branches of Honour spread to all the Children, yet the root remains but with one: For, say a King have many Children, they are all Princes, but yet there can be but one that can inherit the Crown and Royalty: So if a Marquess, or Duke have many Children, they are all Lords and Ladies, if they be lawfully, and in true Wedlock born, otherwise they are not: neither doth any more but one of the Legitimate Children inherit the Root, as to be Marquess or Duke, Duchess or Marchioness: neither do the Daughters inherit, if there be Sons.
But cannot a Dukes Daughter make her Husband a Prince?
No, not except she hath the Inhereditary Honour: for if a Kings Daughter should marry a private Gentleman, he would remain as only in the Title of a Gentleman, unless the King did create a Title for him, or be∣stow a Title on him.
Why? put case the Inhereditary Honour lay in the people, and they elect a King, hath that King no power to Create, or to give Ho∣nor?
No, they may choose Officers, but not give Titles, unless the peo∣ple did dispossess them of their hereditary power, and give it to any man, and then the root of Honour lies in him.
Nor doth his Children receive no Titles from their Father?
No, for the Title he hath, is none of his, he hath it but during life, unless the people will give a Lease, as for two or three Lives, yet they nominate those two or three Lives: So neither can they dispose of their Leases, or alter them, but at the peoples pleasure; like as those that are made Governors, they cannot dispose of their Governments to whom they please, as without the leave of those that placed them in the Government, neither do his Children receive any Titles therefrom; like as a Lord Mayor, his Son is not my Lord Mayor after him, unless he is made one; nor his i will∣drone have no place by his Office, and an elective Prince, is but as a Lord Mayor, or rather like as a Deputy Governor, who as I said, may dispose of Places or Offices, but not give Dignities, Honours, or Titles.
I thank you for your Information, for I was so ignorant, as I knew nothing of Heraldry.
HAve you seen the Imaginary Queen yet?
What Imaginary Queen?
Why a Great Queen, that every one goes to kiss her hand.
From what parts of the World came she?
From the North parts.
And doe so many go to kiss her hand?
Yes, throngings of Common people.
They would kiss the Dogs Tail if it were turned up and presen∣ted to them: but do any of the Nobles and Gentry kiss her hand?
Some few that are newly come out of the Country to see sights in the City.
Pish, in this Age there are so many of these kind of Bedlams, as I am weary to hear of them, as the Comical Duchess, the Creating Princess, and the Created Prince, Prince Shadow, and now the Imaginary Queen.
Why Faith it is as good a sight as to see a Play.
A puppet Play you mean; but the truth is, it is a disgrace to all noble persons, and great dignities, and true titles, to be thus mocked by imi∣tators, it is a sign that all Europe is embroiled in Wars so much as every one doth what they list.
Why they are so far from being checked or discountenanced for it, as there are many true Princes, great and noble persons as give the same respect and homage as if they were real Princes indeed and in truth.
Then it if it were in my power I would divest those that had the right, and true dignities, and titles, and put them upon those that only acted princely and royal parts, since the Actors bear up so nobly, and the Specta∣tors do creep and crouch so basely: but indeed both sides are Actors, both the Spectators and Players, only the one side Acts noble parts, the other side base parts, the one Acts the parts of Princes, the other of Servants; but I am sorrow to see True Honour wounded as it is.
The truth of it is, True Honour lies a bleeding, and none doth offer to power in Balsimum.
Faith Neighbour methinks a Queen is not such a brave and glorious thing as I did imagine it.
I will tell you truly Neighbour, that if I had thought a Queen had been no finer a sight than this Queen is, I would have stayed in my house.
And so would I, I tell you truly Neighbour.
I perceive Queens are no finer Creatures than other wo∣men are.
Lord what a ridiculous sight it is to see the Imaginary Queen act the part of Majesty?
Faith she is so far from Majesty, as she cannot act the part, for she appears like a good Country Huswife.
She is but a Gentlewoman, and that is all.
We may see the difference of true Greatness, and that which is forced, there was the Queen Masculine; what a natural Majesty did she appear with? for all she had given up her Crown and Kingdom, yet her Royal Birth was seen in her Princely Carriage.
It was a generous Act: But was it in her power to dispossess her self of her natural Inheritance?
It seems so; and it seems by her actions that she had rather see the World abroad, than rule a Kingdom at home, for she hath travelled most of all Europe over.
She appears to be a Royal Lady.
The Comical Duchess is brought to bed or the sweetest Prin∣cesse that ever was bore.
Indeed it is the sweetest Princess that ever was born.
We are glad we hope her Highness will sleep well to night.
Pray present our most humble and obedient duty to her High∣ness.
Will you not go in and see her, and kiss the young Princesses hand?
If we may be so much honoured, we shall be very proud of that Grace and Honour.
Come, come, we will prefer you to that Grace and Favour.
welcome Mistress Ink-pot, whether are you going so hastily?
Truly Mistress Paper, I am going to her Highness the Comical Duchess, for I hear she is brought abed of a sweet young Princess.
Is she so? I am glad her Highness pain is past, with all my heart.
So am I, for now we shall have Dancing again, as soon as her Month is past.
Yes, for she will send for us all, as soon as she is able to dance.
Yes that she will, and give us all Favours to wear for her sake.
But to some she gives her Picture too.
Yes, but those she gives her Picture too, are of a higher De∣gre.
By your favour, we are of as high a Degree as most that visit her.
Yes, of the female Sex, but not of the Masculine Sex; for there are great Persons that visit her.
Very few, but only of the Red Oker Nation, or some Strangers that are Travellers, that visit her, as they pass other ways, else the men that visit her, are of as inferior degree as we, as Fiddlers, Dancers, Players, and the like.
By your favour, there are sometimes Burgers and Gentlemen.
Yes sometimes, when she sends for to invite them to dance, or entreats them to come and visit her; and then she presents them with her Co∣lours.
Lord, Madam, I was asked to day, why your Ho∣nor doth not visit the Comical Duchess, nor the Imaginary Queen?
Why, should I that am Entitled with True Honour, and Princely Dignity, which Titles were created from an Absolute and Divine Power, give place to mock Honours, and feigned Dignities? shall Princes in Royal Courts, give place to Princes in Plays?
But every one doth not rightly understand a Princely Dignity.
I will instruct you in the degrees of Princes, and their derivation; but first, let me tell you, the Princely Arms, or Seal, is a Crown; for a Crown is the General Arms, or Seal of all Princely Dignities, and eve∣rye
degree is known and distinguished by the several fashions of their Crowns; for a Vicounts Crown, which is the first degree of a Prince, is not like the Earls Crown, which is the second degree; nor an Earls Crown is not like a Marquesses Crown, which is the third degree; that is, t•ere is some dif∣ference in the Crown; nor a Marquesses Crown is not like a Dukes Crown, which is the fourth degree; nor a Dukes Crown is not like a close Imperi∣al Crown, which is the last and highest degree; that is, there is some dif∣ference in the Crown of each degree: Now there are Absolute Princes, Tributary, and Subject Princes, but none can be wholly called Absolute Prin∣ces, but those that have the Imperial Crown, which are Absolute Kings and Emperors, being the only chosen of God, and by that the only Creators of Titles; for they only are the Fountain, or Springs of Honour.
How comes it that Subjects are made Princes?
By Adoption: for all Subject Princes are Princes by Adoption: that is, they are adopted to their Princely Dignity, so that by Adoption, they are the Cousins to Royalty, and are called by their Sove∣reigns, Kings Cousins, and are adorned with Royal Robes, endued with Roy∣al Power, and observed with Royal Ceremony, and are allowed some Cu∣stoms and Imposts out of the Revenue of the Kingdom, and many privileges which belong to the Princely Dignities: Thus Kings call their Subject Princes, Cousins, as being adopted to their Princely Royalty, like as all Ab∣solute Monarchs call each other Brother, as in relation to each others Roy∣alty: and being all of them Gods anointed, and appointed Deputies on Earth, for Government and Honour, they are the sacred Magistrates of God, the divine Fountains of Honour: Thus true Honour is derived from Heaven, and ought to be respected, and bowed too, as being divine: but in this age Honour is used, or abused, as other divine things are: this is the reason I will not visit the Apocriphal Ladies: for my Honour is derived from the sacred Spring of Honour, and is not a self-given Honour and Dig∣nity, which ought to be punished as a Presumption and Usurpation: but I have so much Honour, as not to abase the Honour and Dignity that my Husband, and his Fore-fathers were adopted too: And I by Marriage, be∣ing one with my Husband; for man and wife are but one, and my Husbands Honour being Inhereditary, succeeds to his Children; wherefore his Wife will never give place to Mountebanks.
Indeed the strange ridiculousness, and folly, and mad presumption is, that the Apocriphal Ladies take more State, or at least as much as sacred Royalty.
But if Royalty will suffer such Heresies, and Heretics in the Court of Honour, they are not to be lamented, if their Courts fall to utter ruin; for it is with Titles and Dignities, as with Laws; if there were no Laws, there would be no Government, and if there were no De∣grees and dignities, there would be no Royalty; so likewise if the Laws be corrupt and abused, Government will fall to ruin, and if Honour be abused and usurped, Royalty will fall from its Throne; but howsoever, I keep up the Right of my place, because it is the cause and interest of all the Nobili∣tie of my Country, so that if I should give place, I should be a Traitor to true Honour, and dignified Persons.
well, now the Duke of Inconstancy hath forsaken our Lady, his Comical Duchess, all our State must down.
Yes, and we must lose our places, in going before others, as being Dutchess's women.
The Duchess cried all night.
2. She had no more reason to cry, than she had, for the matter of Digni∣tie; for, pray consider, her Highness may keep the same State, as being Duchess still, as well as she did before; for she possessed the Honour no more than she doth now, and so now no less than she did then.
That is true, but the Duke did help to countenance her State, so long as he did live with her, as a Husband, whereas now she will be hist off the Stage.
Faith Confidence, and a Resolution will bear her up, where∣fore let us persuade her not to be daunted, or put out of countenance, and she having the same Estate she had, may maintain her self as high as she hath done.
You say true, and the flaunting show will dazzle the eyes, and de∣lude the understanding of the Spectators.
Yes, of the Vulgar.
HOnour goes a begging.
Why?
Why there is an Ale Wife made a Countess.
As how?
Why the Earl Undone hath married Mistress Tip-tape.
But he hath a Wife living.
That is all one, for did not the Duke of Inconstancy marry a Lady, and made her a Duchess, although he had a Duchess to his Wife before, by whom he was a Duke.
I perceive Great Noble Persons may do what they will: for if a poor mean man should have two Wives at one time, they would be surely punished; nay, in some Kingdoms they would be hanged.
DO you hear that the Duke of Inconstancy hath forsaken his Co∣mical Duchess?
Yes, but that is nothing.
Have you been with her Highness since?
Yes.
And how looks she upon her misfortunes?
Why she appears the same, and keeps greater State than ever she did; yea, even her Children are served more royally than ever.
Faith she is to be commended, if it will hold out.
As long as she hath money, it will hold.
O, money doth all things.
Noble Spectators,
IN Britain Land, long, long ago, I say,
There were such persons, as are in my Play;
In Chronicle you'll find a story plain,
A Britain Queen that happily did Reign.
At last did marry one below her State,
Which merited not a Crown, or Kinly Fate;
Fosse he, when Power got, did put away
His Royal Wife; and married, as they say,
Another Lady; She and he did live
Like lawful King and Queen, till God did give
The ronged Queen, her Kingdom back again;
For in a Battle, she her husband slain.
And of the rest, in Stories you shall read,
Such persons as my Play presents indeed.

IF you would have your Daughter virtuously and wisely educated, you must put her into the Female Academy.
The Female Academy, what is that?
Why a House, wherein a company of young Ladies are instructed by old Matrons; as to speak wittily and rationally, and to behave themselves handsomely, and to live virtuously.
Do any men come amongst them?
O no; only there is a large open Grate, where on the out-side men stand, which come to hear and see them; but no men enter into the Academy, nor women, but those that are put in for Education; •o• they have another large open Grate at the other end of the Room they discourse in; where on the out-side of that Grate stand women that come to hear them discourse.
I will put my Daughter therein to be instructed.
If your Daughter were not of honourable Birth, they would not receive her, for they take in none but those of ancient Descent, as also rich, for it is a place of charges.
Why then they will not refuse my Daughter, for she is both ho∣nourably born, and also rich.
Come Lady, it is your turn this day to take the Chair.
Deliver your Theme.
You speak Lady like a Robber, when he says deliver your Purse; but you must say propound your Theme.
Why then propound your Theme.
I present to your opinion, whether women are capable to have as much Wit or Wisdom as men.
First, I must define what Wit and Wisdom are: as for Wit, it is the Daughter of Nature, and Wisdom is a Son of the Gods: this Daughter of Nature, the Lady Wit, is very beautiful, and for the most part her Countenance is very Amiable, and her Speech delightful; in her Acoustrements she is as all other of the Female Sex are, various; as some∣times in plain Garments, and sometimes in glittering Garments; and some∣times she is attired in Garments of as many several Colours as the Rain∣bow; and she alters in their Fashions, as often as in their Substances or Trim∣mings: as for her humour, it is according to the nature of her Sex, which is as various and changing as her Acoustrements; for that sometimes she is merry and jesting, other times pleasing and delightful; sometimes melan∣choly, sometimes fantastical, other times spiteful and censorious, and oft times wild and wanton, unless discretion rules and leads her, who keeps her within the bounds and pales of Modesty; also her discourses are various, as sometimes she will flatter grossly, other times •he will rail maliciously, and sometimes she will speak so eloquently, and demean her self so elegant∣lie, as to ravish the minds of the beholders and •earers• This Lady Wit hath nine Daughters, very beautiful Ladies, namely the Nine Muses; and every several Muse partakes of every several Humour of the Mother: These nine beautiful Ladies, Natures Grand-children, and VVits Daughters, have vowed single lives, living always in the Court with their Mother, whose Court is a very glorious Palace; for it is composed of Celestial flame, and Divine Spirits were the Architectures thereof; the Servants and Courtiers of the Lady Wit are Poets, men of all Nations, Qualities, Dignities and Hue∣morse; these Courtiers the Poets, make love to the Lady Wits Daughters, the nine Muses, and often receive favours from them; which favours their Servants the Poets braid them into Rimes, and make several works of Verse, then tie them into True Lovers Knots, and then as all Lovers use to do, with their Mistresses favours, vaingloriously show them to the public view of the world; for though the Lady Muses will not marry, yet they re∣ceive Courtly addresses, and take delight to be wooed and fued to; the younger sort of Poets are Amorous Lovers; the Grave and more ancient Poets are Platonic Lovers, and some are Divine Lovers, and some are He∣roick Lovers, and some are Satirical Lovers, which woo in a crabbid stile: but to conclude of Wit, there are good VVits which have foolish Judgements; for though Wit and Wisdom are Sisters and Brothers, both the Children of Nature, yet for the most part, the Brother is a mere Fool, and the Sister hath a great wit; but some have Masculine VVits, and Effe∣minate Judgements, as if their beams were Hermophrica.
The next I am to define is Wisdom, who as I said, is a Son of the Gods: this Wisdom is a person of perfect and upright Shape, of well-composed Features, of a manly Garb, and an assured Countenance, In his speech he is of a ready delivery, and he hath a well-tempered Humour: as for the A∣coustrements of his Person, he changes them according to the times and oc∣cessions: His constant habitation is in the strong Tower of Honesty, this
Tower is built round, without ends or corners, or by places; and it stands upon four Pillars, as Prudence, Fortitude, Justice and Temporance; upon e∣very several Pillar are Letters engraven, wherein may be read the proper uses, benefits, and advantages of each Pillar: These Pillars of Support, causes this Tower to be inpregnable; for though there are many assaults made a∣against it, as by Riches, which shoots his golden Bullets out of his golden Canons at it, striving to batter it down; and Power brings a mighty Army to assault it, and Danger of Death strives to storm it, and Flattery and Insi∣nuation to undermine it, yet it holds out without any breach therein; for the walls of this Tower, named Honesty, are of a wonderful strength, for they are as durable as an entire Diamond, not to be dissolved, and as trance∣parent as a Crystal, without the least spot, stain, or blemish: In this Tow∣er as I said, lives Wisdom, a most magnificent Lord he is, and is attended numerously and nobly: his chief Favourite is Truth, his chief Counselors are Reason, Understanding, Observation, Experience, and Judgement; his chief Officers are Patience, Industry, and Opportunity; his Domestic Ser∣vents are the Appetites, which Servants he rules and governs with great mo∣deration; his Nobility are the Passions, which he pe••rrs according to their merit; but those that are apt to be Factious, he severely punishes, for he is one that loves peace, and hates brulleries, or any dissention: he is a person of the quickest Sense, for he hath a most piercing sight to foresee dangers, as to avoid them, and can well distinguish the right ways from the wrong; like∣wise he hath a most clear hearing, for nothing passes by that concerns him, but the sound gives him an Alarm to stand upon his guard, or a charge to take his advantage; but he hath a silent tongue, for he never speaks but it is to some purpose also he hath a marvelous quick Scent, to smell out a Rebellion or Treason, and he will follow it pace by pace, as Hounds do Hares, and never leaves till he hath hunted it out; also his Touch is very sensible, he soon feels a curtsy or injury, the first he receives gratefully, and feels tenderly, the other he receives strongly, and gripes hard, when he can take fast hold, otherwise he lets it pass or fall, as if his touch were numbed; he is a person which is so solicited by the weak, sought to by the wronged, flattered by the ambitious, sued to by the distressed; and he often fits in the Court of Er∣rors, to rectify the disorder therein: sometimes he hath been in great hue∣mane Councels, but that is very rare; indeed he is so seldom in great hue∣mane Councels, as he is hardly known, for not one among a thousand that did ever see him, much less to have any acquaintance with him, for he is reserved, and not company for every one: But there are many that falssy pretend not only to be acquainted with him, but gets fall Vizards, and pretend to be Wisdom it self, and the world for the most part is cozened and abused with these Cheats, in not knowing the right &amp; true Wisdom; and how should they? when Wisdom it self appears so seldom, as he is a stran∣ger even in Kings Courts and Princes Palaces, and so great a stranger he is in many Courts and Councels, that if by chance he should be there, they thrust him out as a troublesome Guest, and laugh at his advice as foolish, or condemn his Counsel as treacherous: but now I have declared unto you whom Wit and Wisdom are, now I am to give my opinion whether wo∣men are capable of their Society; but truly I must tell you it is a difficult question, by reason the several Educations, which are the Ushers that lead humane Creatures to several Societies, for there are Society; of the Igno∣rant and foolish, as well as of the witty and wise, and several Ushers belong∣ing
thereto; and indeed these latter Societies are numerous, and of all sorts; the other are Societies of the most choicest, for though Wit is not an abso∣lute Goddess, nor humane Wisdom an absolute God, yet they are a degree above other earthly mortals, but Fools are produced from the degrees of Mortality, and Ignorance is the Daughter of Obs••rity; the Ushers of these are Obstinacy, Stupidity, and Illiterature, which leads mortals to dangerous and unexcessible ways; in this last Society, for the most part women are of, as being bred therein, and having such ill Tutors and Guides, they must needs err, for there is an old saying, When the Blind leads the Blind, they must needs fall into the Ditch, nor having sight to choose their way; so women bree∣ding up women, the Generations must needs be Fools: for the first, women had an ill Tutor, the Devil, which neither instructed her in the knowledge of Wisdom nor Wit, but learned her hurtful dissimulation, to which she hath bred all her Female Generations successively, as from Female to Fe∣male; but your question is, whether women are capable of Wit and Wis∣dome: truly in my opinion women are more capable of Wit than VVis∣dome, by reason they are both of the Female Gender, which may cause some sympathy in their Natures; and in some thing• they do plainly sympathy and agree, for Wit is wild and various, and so are women, and Wit is busy and meddles with every thing, cause, or subject, so do women; Wit is fantasti∣cal, and so are women, Wit is always in extremes, and so are women, Wit doth talk much, and so do women, Wit is humoursome, and so are women, Wit is prodigal, and so are women, Wit loves praises, and so do women, Wit doth sport and play, dance and sing the time away, and so do women, Wit is many times wanton, and so are women; Thus far are women ca∣pebble of the Society and Conversation of Wit; but I doubt of her subtle Invention, quick Apprehension, rare Conceptions, elevated Fancy, and smooth Eloquution.
As for Wisdom, women seem to all outward appearance to have a natural Antipathy abhorring his severe and strict Rules, hating his medici∣able Admonitions, his profitable Counsels and Advice, his wary ways, his prudent forecast, his serious actions, his temperate life and sober dis∣position; all which makes them incapable of the Society of Wis∣dome.
I suppose you have heard that a company of young Gentlemen have set up an Academy, next to the Ladies A∣cademy.
We heard nothing of it.
Why then I will tell you, the men are very angry that the
women should speak so much, and they so little, I think: for they have made that Room which they stood in to see and hear the Ladies speak in, so a place for themselves to speak in, that the Ladies may hear what they can say.
Faith if you will have my opinion, it is, that the men do it out of a mockery to the Ladies.
It is likely so, for they rail extremely that so many fair young Ladies are so strictly enclosed, as not to suffer men to visit them in the A∣cademy.
Faith if the men should be admitted into their Academy, there would be work enough for the Grave Matrons, were it but to act the part of Midwives.
Lady, at this time let the Theme of your discourse be of dis∣coursing.
As for Discourse it is differently various, some discourses are de∣lightfull and pleasing, others tedious and troublesome, some rude and un∣civil, some vain and unnecessary, some graceful and acceptable, some wise and profitable; but in most discourses time is lost, having nothing that is worthy to be learned, practised, or observed: But there are two sorts of discourses, or manner of ways of discoursings, as there is a discoursing within the mind, and a discourse with words; as for the inward discourse in the mind, it is to discourse to a mans self, as if they were discoursing to others, making Questions or Propositions, Syllogisms and Conclusions to himself, wherein a man may deceive himself with his own false arguments, for it is an old saying, That it is one thing to oppose himself, and another thing to be opposed by others, and it is easy to argue without opposition; As for discoursing with words, it is more difficult than to discourse with thoughts: for though words are as high and substantial as thoughts, yet the Mouth is not so ready in speaking, as the Brain in thinking, and the Brain can present more thoughts at one time, than the Mouth can deliver words at one time: but words, or Rhetoric is apt to deceive a man, as his Concep∣captions, especially Orators, which draw themselves with the force of The∣torick, from the right and the truth, so as an Orator is as apt to delude him∣self, as to delude his Auditory, if he make words or eloquence the ground of his Questions, Persuasions, or Judgement, and not Reason, for Reason must find out the truth, and right, and Truth must judge the cause; but Rhetoric is for the most part a Vizard to right Reason, for it seems a na∣tural Face, and is not so: Rhetoric seems right Reason, but is not: Also there are extemporal discourses, and discourses premeditated, extemporal sounds best to the ears of the hearers, although of less wit than premedita∣ted
discourses, because they are delivered more naturally, and so flow more freely and easily, which makes the noise not only to sound more sweetly, but the discourse to be more delightful both to the ears and the mind of the hearers, and more ready to the understanding; but of all discourses the dis∣putive discourses are harshest: Indeed all disputive discourses are like Chro∣matick Music, wherein is more Skill than Harmony; but all discourses should be fitted, measured, or chosen to the time, place, persons, and occa∣sions, for that discourse which is proper for one time, place, or person, is improper for another time, place, or person, as a discourse of mirth in a time of sadness, a familiar discourse from an Inferior to a Superior, a vain discourse to a serious humour, or an Effeminate discourse to a man, or a Masculine discourse to a woman, and many the like examples might be given: Also there are discourses that are sensible discourses, rational dis∣courses, and witty discourses: also there are other discourses, that have nei∣there Sense, Reason, Wit, nor Fancy in them: Also there are Clownish dis∣courses and Courtly discourses: Also there is a general discoursing, and par∣ticular discoursing, also Scholastical discourses and Poetical discourses: but of all the several ways, manners, or sorts of discourses and discoursings, Let me commend the Poetical discourses and discoursings, which are brief and quick, full of variety, curiosity, and newness, being as new as peep of day, as refreshing as the Zephyrus wind, as modest as the blushing morning, sweet as the flowery Spring, as pleasant as a Summers Evening, as profitable as Autumns Harvest, as splenderous as the mid-day Sun, as flow∣ing as the full Tide Sea, as dilating as the spreading Ayre, as fruitful as the fertile earth, and have as great an influence upon the Natures, Deposit∣once, and Humours of men, as the Stars, &amp; Planets in the Heavens have, it takes life from the Celestial flame, and is produced from the Gods on high: and this discourse makes Man resemble to a Deity.
Whither so hastily?
I am going to hear them speak in the Academy.
They have done for this time.
And did they spaek well.
As they use to do.
Why they never spake before there?
Where?
Why in the Academy.
Why I am sure I heard one Lady speak yesterday, and another to day.
Ladies, I mean the Academy of men.
Why do the men intend to speak?
Yes presently, if they have not done speaking already.
Gentlemen, we need no Learned Scholars, nor Grave Sages to propound the Theme of our discourse in this place, and at this time; for our minds are so full of thoughts of the Female Sex, as we have no room for any other Subject or Object; wherefore let the Theme be what it will, our discourses will soon run on them: but if we could bring women as easily into our arms, as into our brains; and had we as many Mistresses in our possessions, as we have in our imaginations, we should be much more happy than we are; Nay, had we been blind, deaf, and insensible to the Sex, we had been happy, unless that Sex had been more kinder than they are; but they are cruel, which makes men miserable: but Na∣ture had made Beauty in vain, if not for the use of the Masculine Sex, wherefore Nature forbids restraint, and it is a sin against Nature for women to be In•loy∣stred, Retired, or restrained: Nay, it is not only a sin against Nature, but a gre∣vous sin against the Gods, for women to live single lives, or to vow Verge∣nity: for if women live Virgins, there will be no Saints for Heaven, nor worcester∣ship nor Adoration offred to the Gods from Earth: for if all women live Fire∣ings, the Race of Mankind will be utterly extinguished; and if it be a general sin to live Virgins, no particular can be exempted; and if it be lawful for one to live a Virgin, it is lawful for all; so if it be unlawful for one, it is unlaw∣full for all; but surely the Gods would not make any thing lawful that were against themselves: But to conclude, those women which restrain them∣selves from the company and use of men, are damned, being accused by Men, judged by Nature, and condemned by the Gods.
What say you, will you go into the Academy?
No faith, I mean not to be damned.
I am of your mind, I will run unto the men to save me.
So will I, since the ways of Salvation are so easy and so plea∣sant.
Lady, let the Theme of your discourse be at this time on the behaviour of our Sex.
It is a greater difficulty for a woman to behave her self dis∣creetly in private Visitations, than for a man to speak wisely in privy Coun∣cells: and it is a greater difficulty for a woman to behave her self well in a pub∣lick Assembly, than for a man to speak eloquently in a public Auditory: and it is a greater difficulty for a woman to behave her self well to several Persons, and in several Assemblies, than for a man to behave himself gallant∣lie in several Battles, and as much dishonour comes in the misbehaviour of the one, as the cowardliness of the other: Wherefore there requires as much skill, care, and conduct in a women's behaviour, in visiting, entertain∣ing, placing, applying, and discoursing, as to a Commander in Mustering, Training, Entrenching, Besieging, Inbattelling, Fighting, and Retreating; for it is not enough for a woman to behave her self according to her De∣gre, Quality, Dignity, Birth, and Breeding, Age, Beauty, Wit, and For∣tune; But according to Time, Place, and Occasion, Business, and Affairs, as also to the Humours, Capacities, Professions, Dignities, Qualities, Births, Breedings, Fortunes, Ages, and Sexes of those persons she is in Company and Conversation withal: Also in mixed Companies she must have a mixed behaviour, and mixed discourses, as sometimes to one, then to another, ac∣cording as she can handsomely and civilly apply or address her self; and to those that apply and address themselves to her: for a woman must not be∣have her self, or discourse unto a great Lord or Prince, as to a Peasant, or to a Peasant as to a great Lord or Prince, nor to a Soldier as to a Divine, nor to a Divine as to a Soldier, nor to a States-man as to a Tradesman, nor to a Tradesman as to a States-man, nor to a Flattering Gallant, as to a Grave Senior, nor to a Grave Senior as to a Flattering Gallant, nor to a young man as to an ancient man, nor to a Boy as to a man, nor to a woman as to a man, nor to a Poet as to a woman, or as to those men that understand not Poetry, nor to learned men, as to ignorant men. Also an ancient Grave Ma∣tron must not behave her self like a wanton young Girl, nor a Wife like a Maid, nor a Widow like a Wife, nor a Mother like her Daughter, nor a Mistress like her Servant, nor a Servant like a Mi∣stress, nor a great Lady like a Country wise, nor a Country wife like a great Lady, for that would be ridiculous; Indeed it is easier for a middle Rank or Degree, at least it is oftner seen, to behave themselves better than those of high Titles and great Estates, or those of a very mean Condition, and of low Birth, for the one is apt to err with excessive pride, the other with an ex∣cessive rudeness, both being bold and ignorantly bred, knowing not how to be civil, nor what belongs to civil Persons; for the pride of the one scorns to be instructed, and the poverty of the other hath not means to keep and pay Instructors; for the excess of Plenty nuzzles the one in Ignorance, and excess of Poverty blindfolds the other from knowledge: but to conclude of the behaviour of women, first as to the generality, they must behave them∣selves
civilly and circumspectly, to particulars, modestly and friendly; for the chief Principals of behaviour are twelve, six good, and six bad; the six good are, Ceremony, Civility, Modesty, Humility, Friendship, and Obedience: The first is Majestic and Magnificent, the second Noble, the third Virtuous, the fourth Humane, the fifth Generous, the sixth Pious; The first is Graceful, the second Sociable, the third Delightful, the fourth Natural, the fifth Helpful, the sixth Necessary; The first belongs to Dignity, the second to Breeding, the third to Youth, the fourth to Age, the fifth to Wealth, the sixth to Peace.
As for the six bad Principals, is, to be Proud, Bold, Rude, Wanton, Dis∣obedient, and Cruel; The first is, Insolent, the second Impudent, the third Ignorant, the fourth Brutish, the fifth Unnatural, the sixth Wicked: The first lives with mean Births, joined with good Fortune, the second lives with ignorant &amp; doltish Spirits, the third with base Breeding, the fourth with Beasts, the fifth with uncivil Nations, the sixth with Atheists: The first is to be Slighted, the second to be Pitied, the third to be Shunned, the fourth to be Hated, the fifth to be Governed, the sixth to be Punished.
what say you to these young Ladies?
I say, that though they be but young Ladies, they discourse like old Women.
THe beauty of the Female Sex hath as great an influence up∣on the eyes of men, as the stars of the Heavens have upon their nature and disposition: but as a cloud of ill Education, covers, champion∣ges, or buries the good influence of the Stars; so a cloud of Time covers, changes, and buries the beauties of the fairest Ladies faces, which alters the affections of men, and buries all the delight that was received there-from, in the ruins of age, and the graves of wrinkles: But beauty, whilst it is fresh and flourishing, it is the most powerful Conquers and Triumphs in the Chariot of Youth; and though her Masculine Subjects forsake her, when time hath displaced her, and weakened her power; yet she were unwise, not to take pleasure in her Victories, whilst she may.
COme, come, Neighbour, we shall get no room to see and hear the young Ladies, if we go not quickly.
Yes, let us go; but stay Neighbour, I must run home again, for I have left the key in the Celar door.
Let it be there for this time.
By my truth I must not, for my maid Join, and the Prentice, will drink out all my Ale, and strong Beer, and there will be none left to give my Husband a draught when he goes to bed.
What, Neighbour, are you come back already?
Why there is no getting in; the Door-keeper beat me back, and said there was no room for Citizens VVives, for the room was only kept for Ladies, and Gentlewomen of Quality.
Well, we may come to be Ladies one day, although not Gentle∣women, and then we shall not so often be beaten back.
Let us go to the Gentlemen's side, they will receive us, and use us kindly.
LAdies, let the Theme of our discourse, at this time, be of Truth.
Truth, although she hath but one face, which is a natural face, yet she hath many several countenances; for sometimes her countenance is severe, other times kind and familiar, sometimes it is sad, sometimes merry, other times pleasing and delightful: also she hath as different humours, as she hath countenances, according to the Cause, or Occasion; likewise, her presence, or approach, shows the different Effects, and several Causes; or from one Cause on several Objects, or Subjects: As for Example, some∣times her Approach shows man to be Miserable, or Happy; as when she comes to inform him of good Fortune, or bad; or when she presents him with right Understanding of the condition he is in: But in Truth, in what∣soever countenance, or humour she puts on, she is a most beautiful Lady: for although she do not shine as the Sun, which dazzles and obscures the sight with his splendrous beams, yet she doth appear like a bright, clear day, wherein, and whereby, all things are seen perfectly; and although she have various Humours, yet her Actions are just, for the alteration of her Countenance, and Humours, are not to deceive men, nor she takes no de∣light
in her own sad Approach, to grieve men, but she doth bear apart, both of their Grief and Joy: she makes neither the Chances, Fortunes, Accidents nor Actions, but only declares them: she is neither the Cause, nor Effects, but only shows the several Effects of Causes, or what causes those Effects: She is of a sweet Nature, and an humble Disposition, she doth as freely, and commonly accompany the Poor, as the Rich, the Mean as the Great: Indeed, her constant Habitation and dwelling, is among the Learned and Industrious men; but she hath an opposite or rival, namely Falsehood, which often obscures her, and is often preferred before her: this Falsehood, her Ri∣val, is of the nature of a Courtesan, as all Courtesans are, as to flatter, and insinuate her self and company, to all men's good liking, and good opinion: she is full of deceit and dissembling, and although she hates Truth, yet she imitates her as much as she can; I do not say she imitates the Justice, Se∣verity, and Plainness of Truth; for those, of all things, or actions, she shuns; but she imitates her Behaviour and Countenance; for although Falsehood is fowl, and filthy of her self, yet by artificial Paint, she makes herself ap∣pear as fair, and pure as Truth; but the deservingly Wife can soon see the difference between the artificial fair of Falsehood, and the true, natural, fair complexion of Truth, although fools do admire, and are sooner caught, so, for the most part deceived with the deceiving Arts of Falsehood, than the natural Verity of Truth: for Falsehood makes a glaring show at the first sight, but the more she is viewed, the worse she appears; whereas Truth, the more she is viewed, the better she appears: also Falsehood uses Rheto∣rick, to allure and deceive with her Eloquent Tongue, whereas Truth speaks little her self, but brings always, and at all times, and in all places, and to all things, Right Reason, and plain Proof to speak for her, who speak without flourishing Phrases, or decking Sentences, or Scholastical Rules, Methods or Tenses, but speak to the purpose, deliver the matter briefly, and keep to the sense of Truth, or true sense, which is both the best and natural way of speaking, and the honest Practice of Truth, whereas Eloquence is one of the most cozening and abusing Arts as is; for as Paint is a Vizard on the face, so is Eloquence a Vizard on the mind, and the Tongue is the Pencil of Decay•, drawing the Pictures of Discourse; thus Falsehood strives to resemble Truth, as much as artifi∣cially she can.
How do you like the Ladies and their discoursings?
I like some of the Ladies •iscourses better than others; and I like some of the Ladies better than the other; but let us go hear the men.
Those women that retire themselves from the Com∣pany of men, are very ungrateful; as, first to Nature, because she made them only for breed; next to men who are their Defenders, Protectors, their Nourishers, their Maintainers; their Instructors, their Delighters, their Admirers, their Lovers and Deisiers; as men defend them from the raging blustering Elements, by building them Houses, and not only build them Houses for shelter, but Houses for pleasure and magnificence: Also men protect them from wild ravenous and cruel Beasts, that otherwise would devour them; for as women have not natural strength to build, so have they not natural courage to sight, being for the most part as fearful as weak: Likewise men nourish them, for men Fish Fowl, and hunt to get them Food to feed them, for which women would neither take the pains, nor endure the labour, nor have the heart to kill their food; for women by nature are so pitiful, and have such tender dispositions, as they would rather suffer death themselves, than destroy life in other Cry∣tures; Also men maintain them by composing themselves into Common∣welds, wherein is Traffic and Commerce, that each Family may live by each other; Also Laws to keep them in peace, to rule them in order, to defend them with Arms, which women could never do, by reason they know not what Government to settle in or to, nor what Laws to make, or how to execute those Laws that were made; neither could they plead Suits, decide Causes, Judge Controversies, deal out right, or punish Injuries, or condemn Criminals: Also men are the Instructors to inform them of Arts and Sciences, which women would ne'er have had the patience to study, for they would no¦ver have allowed so much time and solitary musing, for the perfecting or de∣voting those Conceptions, as those that first invented or found them out; be∣sides if women were not instructed by men of the natural cause of Effects,
how often would they have been affrighted almost to death, with the loud and terrifying Thunders, the flashing Lightnings, the dark Eclipses, the un∣steady Earthquakes, the overflowing Tides, and many the like natural Of∣fects from hidden Causes • besides, women would want all those convenien∣cies that Art affords them, and furnishes them with: Also men instruct wo∣men with the Mystery of the Gods, whereas for want of which knowledge, they would have been damned through ignorance: Also men are their De∣lighters, they traffic on the Sea, all over the world, to every several Cli∣mate and Country, to find and to bring the Female Sex Curiosities, hazar∣ding their lives for the same; whereas women could neither build their Ships, nor guide them on the Seas when they were built; they have not strength to pull and tug great Cable Ropes, to set and spread large Sails, to cast and weigh Massy Anchors, no, not in a calm, much less in furious storms, with which men often fight, though not with Arms, with Subtility and Skill, by which the Elements are conquered still, whereas women are conquered, and not only being strengthless and heartless, but healthlesse; for not only the roaring Seas, and whistling winds, and rattling showers, and rumbling Thunders, and fiery Lightnings, Rocks, Shelves, and Sands un∣known, or not to be avoided, besides Mountains of Ice, if to the Northern Pole, all which would terrify them, yet their weak bodies, sick stomachs, and nice Appetites, could never endure long Voyages; they would vomit out their life before they could sail to their assigned Port, or Haven: Also men are women's admirers; they gaze on their Beauties, and praise their sweet Graces, whereas women through envy detract from each other; Al∣so men are women's only True Lovers, they flatter, kiss and please them, whereas women are apt to quarrel, rail and fight with each other: And lastly, men Deify women, making them Goddesses by their Poetical Descrip∣tions &amp; Elevations, whereas Nature made them mere Mortals, Human cry∣tures; wherefore it is a great ingratitude, nay a horrid ingratitude in those wo∣men, that deny men their Company, Conversation, and Communication• wherefore men have not only Reason to take it ill, but to be angry with those women that shun or restrain their Company from them; but good Counsel ought to go before Anger, for the difference betwixt good Counsel and Anger, is, that good Counsel goes before a fault is committed, and Anger follows when a fault is committed, for as good Counsel or Admonishment is to prevent a fault, so Anger is a Punishment for a fault past.
Is your Daughter put into the Academy?
Yes.
How long Madam hath your Daughter been in the Aca∣demi?
This week, but she hath not profited much, for I do not hear her discourse.
First it is to be considered, whether your Daughter be capable of discoursing, for she must have a natural ingenuity to the Art of Rheto∣rick.
My Daughter was always a pretty talking Girl, as any in all the Country and Town I lived in.
Yes, Children may talk prettily for Children, but when they come to be women, it is a question whether they will talk wisely or no; but let us go hear which of the Ladies discourses to day.
Lady, for this time let the Theme of your discourse be of Dis∣course.
Reverend Matron, this Theme hath been discoursed of be∣fore by one of our Academy, but yet by reason one and the same Theme may be discoursed of after different manners or ways, I shall obey you.
As for Discourse, there is of four sorts; the first is discoursing in the mind, which is reasoning.
The second is discoursing with words, which is speaking,
The third is discoursing by signs, which is action or acting.
The last is discoursing by Figures, which is by Letters and Hieroglyphics, which is by Printing, Writing, Painting, and the like.
As for the first, which is a discourse in the mind, which is Reasoning, which reasoning is a discourse with things, and not with words, as such a thing is not such a thing, and what such things are, and what they are not, or in what such things agree or disagree, sympathy, or antipathy, or such things resemble, or not resemble, or on the cause of things, or their effects, or the like: This discourse is in the mind, which is distinguishing, and di∣stinguishing belongs to Judgement.
The second discoursing is with words, which is Speech, and words are not things or notches, but only marks of things, or nicks, or notches to know things by; and the Tongue is the Tally on which they are scored: for Speech is a number of words, which words are made and joined together by the Breath, Tongue, Teeth, and Lips, and the continuance make a discourse; for a discourse is like a line or thread, whereon are a number of words strung, like as a Chain of Beads, if the words be well sorted, and fitly and properly matched, as also evenlystrung, the discourse is pleasant and de∣lightfull; this Chain of discourse is longer or shorter, according as the Speaker pleases. The third discourse, is a discourse by Signs, which is in Actions, as some can discourse by the Motion of their Faces, Countenances, Hands, Fingers, Paces, or Measures, or by the cast of the Eyes, and many such like Postures, Looks, Actions, and several such ways of Motion as have been invented to be understood. This and the first kind of discourse, as by
things and motions, beasts may have, for ought we can know to the country∣rye. The last is by Figures, or Letters, Prints, Hieroglyphics, and painted Stories, or engraven in Metal, or cut, or carved in Stone, or molded, or for∣med in Earth, as clay, or the like; in this kind of discourse, the Pencil hath sometimes out-done the Pen, as the Painter hath out-done the Historian and Poet: This discoursing by Signs, or Figures, are discourses to the eye, and not to the ear. There is also another kind, or sort of discoursing, which is hardly learned as yet, because newly invented, or at lest, to what I have heard, which is by Notes, and several Strains in Music. I only mention it, because I never heard it but once, and then I did not understand it: but yet it was by a skilful and ingenious Musician, which discoursed a story of his Tra∣veals, in his playing on a Musical Instrument, namely, the Harpsical. But certainly, to my understanding, or reason, it did seem a much easier way of discoursing, than discoursing by actions, or posture. But to end my discourse of Discoursing, which discoursing may be by several ways, several actions and postures, by several creatures, and in several Languages: but reasoning is the Souls Language, words the Language of the Senses, action the Lifes Language, Writing, Printing, Painting, Carving and Molding, are Arts se∣viral Languages, but Music is the Language of the Gods.
HOw do you like the Ladies discourse?
As I like discourse.
How is that?
Why I had rather hear a number of words, than speak a number∣ber of words.
Then thou art not of the nature of Mankind; for there is no man that had not rather speak than hear.
No, it is a sign I am not of the nature of Woman-kind, that will hear nothing, but will speak all; indeed, for the most part, they stop their Ears with their Tongues, at lest, with the sound of their Voices.
IT were too tedious to recite the several humours of the female Sex; their scornful Pride, their obstinate Retiredness, their reserved Coyness, their facile Inconstancy, by which they become the most useless, and most unprofitable Creatures that nature hath made; but when they are joined to men, they are the most useful, and most profitable Cry∣tures nature hath made; wherefore, all those women that have common reason, or sense of shame, will never retire themselves from the company of
men: for what women that have any consideration of Honour, Truth, or touch of Goodness, will be the worst of all Creatures, when they may be the best? but the truth of it is, women are spoiled by the over-fond dotage of men; for being flattered, they become so self-conceited, as they think they were only made for the Gods, and not for men; and being Mistresses of men's affections, they usurp their Masculine Power and Authority, and instead of being dutiful, humble and obedient to men, as they ought to be, they are Tyrannical Tyrannizers.
THe young Gallants methinks begin to be whetted with An∣ger.
They have reason, when the women have such dull, blunt Ap∣petites.
LAdies, let the Theme of your discourse be, at this time, of Friendship.
This Theme may more easily be discoursed of, than Friend∣ship made; by reason it is very difficult to make a right Friendship, for hard it is to match men in agreeable Humours, Appetites, Passions, Capa∣cities, Conversations, Customs, Actions, Natures and Dispositions, all which must be to make a true and lasting Friendship, otherwise, two Friends will be like two Horses that draw contrary ways, whereas Souls, Bodies, Education and Lives, must equally agree in Friendship; for a worthy ho∣nest man cannot be a friend to a base and unworthy man, by reason Friend∣ship is both an offensive and defensive League between two Souls and By∣dies; and no actions, either of the Souls or Bodies, or any outward thing, or fortune belonging thereunto, are to be denied; wherefore Knaves with Knaves, and unworthy Persons with unworthy Persons, may make a Friend∣ship, &amp; Honest men with Honest men, and worthy Persons with worthy Per∣sons, may do the like: but an Honest man with a Knave, or a worthy Person with a base man, or an Honourable Person with a mean Fellow, a noble Soul with a base Nature, a Coward with a Valiant man, can make no true Friendship. For, put the case, in such friendships, my Friend should desire me to do a base Action for his sake, I must either break Friendship, or do unworthily, but as all worthy Persons make Truth their Godesse, which they seek and worship, Honour the Saint which they pray too, Ver∣tu,
the Lady which they serve, so Honesty is the only Friend they trust and rely on, and all the World is obliged to Honesty, for upright and just dea∣ling.
Methinks the women's Lectural discourse is better than the men's; for in my opinion, the men's discourses are simple, childish, and foolish, in comparison of the women's,
Why, the subject of the discourse is of women, which are simple, foolish, and childish.
There is no sign of their simplicity or folly, in their discourse or Speeches, I know not what may be in their Actions.
Now you come to the point, for the weakness of women lies in their Actions, not in their Words; for they have sharp Wits and blunt Judgements.
Lady, let the Theme of your discourse to day be of a Theatre.
A Theatre is a public place for public Actions, Orations, Disputations, Presentations, whereunto is a public resort; but there are only two Theatres, which are the chief, and the most frequented; the one is of War, the other of Peace; the Theatre of War is the Field; and the Battles they sight, are the Plays they Act, and the Soldiers are the Trage∣dan•s, and the Theatre of Peace is the stage, and the Plays there Acted are the Humours, Manners, Dispositions, Natures, Customs of men thereon descry∣bed and acted, whereby the Theatres are as Schools to teach Youth good Principles, and instruct them in the Nature and Customs of the World and Mankind, and learn men to know themselves better than by any other way of instruction; and upon these Theatres• they may learn what is noble and good, what base and wicked, what is ridiculous and misbecoming, what graceful and best becoming, what to avoid and what to imitate; the Ge∣nius that belongs to the Theatre of War is Valour, and the Genius that
belongs to the Theatre of Peace is Wit: the designer of the rough Plays of War, is a General or Council; the designer of the smooth Plays of Peace is a Poet, or a chief Magistrate; but the difference of these Plays Acted on each Theatre, is, the one is real, the other feigned, the one in earnest, the other in jest; for a Poet only feigns Tragedies, but the Soldiers do truly act Tragedies; on the Poetical Theatre I will only insist, for this Theatre be∣longs more to our persons, and is a more fitter Subject for the discourse of our Sex, than War is; for we delight more in Scenes than in Battles: I will begin first with Poets, who are the Authors and makers of these kind of Plays; Fame hath spoke loud, both of ancient and modern Poets; as for the ancient Poets, they are a length out of the reach of my Judgement, so as my opinion will hardly reach so far; but as for our Modern Poets, that have made Plays in our Modern times, although they deserve praise, yet not so much nor so high Applause as is given them; for most of their Plors, or Foundation of their Plays, were taken out of old Authors, as from the Greeks and Romans, Historians and Poets, also all the Modern Romances are taken out of these Stories, and many Plays out of these To∣mances.
Lady, give me leave a little while to instruct you, as to tell you, that all Romances should be so; for the ground of a right Romance is a true story, only falsehood is intermixed therein, so that a Romance is a compound of Truth and Falsehood.
Give me leave to answer you, that in my opinion, a right Romance is Poetical Fictions put into a Historical Stile; but for Plays, the true Comedy is pure Love and Humours, also the Customs, Manners, and the Habits, and inbred qualities of mankind; And right tragicomedies are the descriptions of the Passions which are created in the Soul; And a right Tragedy is intermixed with the Passions, Appetites, and Humours of men, with the influence of outward actions, accidents, and misfortunes: but as I said, some Poets take the Plots out of true History, others out of feigned History, which are Romances, so as their Plots (for the most part) are mere Translations, and oft times the Wit is also but a translated Wit, only metamorphosed after their own way; but the truth is, that some of them their Wit is their own, and their Plots were stolen, or plainly taken, and some their Plots are their own, but the Wit stolen; but of all theft, Wit is never confessed; and some neither the Plot nor Wit is their own, and other; both Plots and Wit are truly their own; These last Poets (although but very few) are the true Sons of Nature, the other but as adulterate issues; But for the most part, our Modern Plays, both Plots and Wit, are mere translations, and yet come out as boldly upon the Stage, as if the Translators were the Original Authors, thinking, or at least hoping that the alteration of the Language conceals the theft, which to the unlearned it doth, but the learned soon find them out, and see all their Bodies, Wings, Legs, Tail, and Feathers, although they hide their head in the Bush of Ignorance. I speak not in discommendation of these Translations, nor Translators, for Translations are so far from being condemned, as they ought to be much, nay very much commended, and highly praised, if it be such as is praise worthy, for old Authors may in some expressions be more profitable and good, both for Wit and Examples, than the modern; and the Translators may be commended both for their Judgement and Learning; besides, very good Translators must have a sympathetical Genius, with the Original
Author, but their Condemnation proceeds from the Translators unjust own∣ing of it, upon themselves, or in translating it to the Authors preju∣dice.
Lady, let me interrupt you once again, to ask your opinion how you like the Italian and French Plays.
As well as I can like any thing that is a strain beyond Na∣ture, or as I may say, Natures Constraint: for the truth is, in their discourse or rehearsals, they do not only raise their Voice a Note or two too high, but many Notes too high, and in their actions they are so forced, as the Spectators might very easily believe the Actors would break their Sinew-strings; and in their Speech they fetch their breath so short and thick, and in such painful fetches and throws, as those Spectators that are Strangers, might verily believe that they were gasping for life.
But Lady, all know Love, which is the Theme or Subject of Plays, is a violent passion, which forces the Players to an Elevation of Action and Speech.
Most Reverend Matron, my opinion is, that though it be commendable and admirable for the Poet to be elevated with a Poetical Di∣vine Inspiration to outdo Nature; yet for the Actors, their best grace is to Play or Act in the Tracts or Paths of Nature, and to keep within Natures bounds; and whenever they go awry, or transgress therefrom, they are to be condemned, and to be accounted ill Actors; and as for the Passions of Love, certainly the strongest Love is like the deepest Water, which is most silent, and least unnecessarily active; they may sometimes mur∣mur, with winds of sighs, but never roar; they neither foam nor froth with violence, but are composed into a heavy body, with a settled sadness: But in short, the Italian and French Players act more Romantical than Natural, which is feigned and constrained: but to conclude with the Poet, he delights the Ear and the Understanding with the variety of every thing that Nature, hath made, or Art invented; for a Poet is like a Bee, that gathers the sweet of every Flower, and brings the Honey to his Hive, which are the Ears and Memory of the Hearers, or Readers, in whose Head his Wit swarms; but as Painters Draw to the life, so Poets should Write to the life, and Players Act to the life.
The Academy of Ladies take no notice of the Academy of Men, nor seem to consider what the men say, for they go on their own serious way, and edifying discourses.
At which the men are so angry, as they have sworn to leave off talking, and instead thereof, they will sound Trumpets so loud, when the La∣dys are in their discoursings, as they shall not hear themselves speak; by which means they hope to draw them out of their Cloister, as they swarm Bees; for as Bees gather together at the sound of a Basin, Kettle, or such like met∣led
thing: so they will disperse that swarm of Academical Ladies, with the sound of brazen Trumpets.
Why the Ladies look through their Grate, upon the men, whilst the men are speaking, and seem to listen to what they speak, as the men do on and to the Ladies.
That is true, but they take no notice of them in their literal Dis∣courses, as what the men have said; for they neither mention the men, nor their Discoursings, or Arguments, or Academy, as if there were no such men.
LAdy, let the Theme of your discourse be, at this time, of Va∣nity, Vice, and Wickedness.
There is a difference betwixt Vanity, Vice, and Wicked∣ness: Wickedness is in the will, Vice in the desires, and Vanity in the actions Will proceeds from the Soul, Vice from the Appetites, and Action from Custom, or Practice; the Soul is produced from the Gods, the Ap∣petites created by Nature, and Custom is derived from Time: As for De∣sires, we may desire, and not will, and we may will, and not act, and we may act, and neither will, nor desire, and we may desire, will, and act all at once; and to some particulars, we may neither desire, will nor act; but the Will makes Vice Wickedness, and Vanity Vice; the willing of good, proceeds from the Gods, the willing of evil proceeds from the Devils: so that Sin is to will evil, in despite of good, and Piety is to will good, in de∣spite of evil, as neither the persuasions, nor temptations of the one, or the other, shall draw our wills; for sin, or wickedness, is neither in the Know∣ledg, nor Appetites: for if our Great Grandmother Eve, had not wilful∣lie eat of that which was strictly forbidden her, she had not sinned, for if that she had only heard of the effects of that Fruit, or had desired it, yet had not wilfully eaten thereof, she had never damned her Posterity: Thus, to will against the Gods command, is Wickedness: but there is no such thing as Wickedness, in Nature, but as I said Wickedness proceeds from the Soul, Vice from the Appetites, and Vanity from the Actions: as for Wick∣oddness, it is like a dead Palsy, it hath no sense, or feeling of the Grace or Goodness of the Gods, and Vice is like an unwholesome Meat, cut out by the Appetites, for the Appetites are like knives, whereas some are blunt, others are sharp, and as it were, too much edged, but they are either blunt, of sharp, according as Nature whets them: but if they be very sharp, as to be keen, they wound the body, and make the life bleed. As for Vanity, it is as the froth of life, it is light, and swims atop, which bubbles out into extravagant and uprofitable actions, false opinions, and idle, and impose∣ble Imaginations. But as I said, it is not the knowledge of Vanity, Vice and Wickedness, that makes a creature guilty thereof, but the Will, and wilful Practice thereof, for Wickedness, Vice, and Vanity, must be known as much as Piety, Virtue, and Discretion, otherwise men may run into evil,
through ignorance; wherefore it is as great a shame to Education, not to be instructed in the bad, as it is a glory to be instructed in the good: but the Que∣stion will be, whether Knowledge can be without a partaking thereof? I An∣swer, not a perfect Knowledge, but a suppositive Knowledge• for there are many things which cannot be perfectly known, but suppositively known: so we must only know Wickedness, Vice, and Vanity, as we do know the Gods and De∣vils, which is by a lively Faith; so as we must be instructed in all that is Pious, Virtuous, and Judicious, as we are instructed of the Power and Goodness of the Gods; and we must be instructed in all that is Wicked, Vicious, and Idle, as we are of the Evil, and Power of the Devils. Now I must inform you, that there are three sorts of Knowledge, as a knowledge of Possession, a knowledge of Action, and a knowledge of Declaration; the knowledge of Action lies in the Appetites, the knowledge of Declaration lies in the Sen∣ses, the knowledge of Possession in the Will, Action and Declarations. As for example, we may hear, and see, Drunkenesse, Adultery, Murder, Theft, and the like, and have no appetite to the same Actions; also we may have an appetite to the same Actions, yet not a will to act the same; but if we have a desire, and will act the same, we have, and are possessed with the most perfect Knowledge thereof; but this last Know∣ledge is utterly unlawful in things that are evil, but not in things that are good: But to conclude, we must be instructed by a Narrative way, and by the intelligence of our ears, and eyes, in that which is evil, as well, and as plainly, as in things that are good, not to be ignorant in any thing that can be declared unto us, not staying until we be Old, but to be thus instructed whilst we are young; for many that are young Novices, commit many e∣vils through ignorance, not being instructed, and informed plainly and clear∣lie, but darkly, and obscurely, caused by their foolish, cautionary, formal Tutors, or Educators, who hold that erroneous opinion, that Youth ought not to know such, or such Things, or Acts; which if they had known, evil might have been prevented, and not left until their evil be known by Pra∣ctice; so that more evil is rather known by Practice, than Declaration, or instruction of Information: but if our Senses are a guide to our Reason, and our Reason a guide to our Understanding, and that the Reason and Understanding governs our Appetites, then tic probable, our Sense, Reason, and Understanding, may govern our Will.
THis is not to be suffered: for if we should let these Ladies rest in peace and quiet, in their enclosed Habitation, we shall have none but Old Women; for all those young Ladies, that are not in the Aca∣demi, talk of nothing but of going into a Female Academy.
You say true, insomuch as it begins to be a Mode, and a Fashion,
for all the Youngest, Fairest, Richest, and Noblest Ladies, to enclose them∣selves into an Academy.
Nay, we must seek some way, and devise some means to unroost them.
There is nothing can do it, but noise; for they take such plea∣sure in the exercise of their Tongues, that unless we can put them to silence, there is no hopes to get them out.
Trumpets, I doubt, will not be loud enough.
Let us try.
Content, Content, &amp;c.
LAdy, let the Theme of your discourse be, at this time, of Boldness, and Bashfulness.
There are three sorts of Boldness, or Confidence, the one proceeds from Custom, or Practice, as it may be observed by Preachers, Pleaders, and Players, that can present themselves, speak, and act freely, in a public Assembly.
The second sort of Boldness, or Confidence, proceeds from Ignorance, not foreseeing what errors, or follies, may be committed, or chance to fall out, or what is fittest to be done, or said; like as poor mean Country peo∣ple, who have neither Birth nor Breeding, have so much Confidence, as they can more confidently present themselves, or presence, to those of Noble Birth and Breeding, and can more freely, and boldly, talk to any Person, or Persons, of what Quality, or Dignity soever, than those Noble Persons can talk to them.
The third, and last sort of Confidence, or Boldness, proceeds from an extraordinary Opinionatedness, or self-conceitednesse; for those that think, or believe themselves to be above others, in Wit, Person, Parts, or Power, although they have neither, will be most haughtily, and proudly confident, scorning, and undervaluing all others, as inferior. Thus bold Confidence, or confident Boldness, is produced from Practice, Ignorance, and Pride.
Also there are three sorts of Bashfulness.
The one proceeds from too great an Apprehension.
The other from a poetical Fiction.
The third from an aspiring Ambition.
First, from too great an Apprehension, as some are afraid that their Obe∣servers, or Friends, should make an evil Construction of their good Intone∣tions. Others will be Bashful, and out of Countenance, upon a poetical Fiction, as imagining of some impossible, or at least some improbable ac∣cident, which may fall out to their disgrace. The third and last is, through an aspiring Ambition, desiring to out-act all others in Excellencies, and
fearing to fail therein, is apt to be out of Countenance, as if they had recei∣ved a foil; thus we may perceive that the Stream of good Nature, the piercing Beams of Wit, and the Throne of Noble Ambition is the true cause of bashfulness, I mean not shamefastness, but sweet bashfulness: but although bashfulness is a sweet, tender, noble, and piercing Effect, of and from the Soul; yet bashfulness is apt to unstring the Nerves, to weaken the Sinews, to dull the Senses, to quench the Spirits, to blunt the eyes or points of Wit, and to obstruct the Speech, insomuch as to cause the words to run stumblingly out of the mouth, or to suffer none to pass forth: but a little Anger in the Mind will take off the extreme bashfulness of the Behaviour, although much Anger doth obstruct the Senses, Spirits and Speech, as much as extreme Bashfulness doth: for extreme anger, and extreme bash∣fullness, have often one and the same Effects to outward Appea∣rance.
The Gentlemen will turn Trumpeters, for a Regiment of Gentle∣men have bought every one of them a Trumpet, to sound a March to the Academy of Ladies.
Faith if the Ladies would answer their Trumpets with blow∣ing of Horns, they would serve them but as they ought to be set∣ved.
Women will sooner make Horns, than blow Horns.
Lady, let the Theme of your discourse at this time be of Fire∣tuous Courtships, and wooing Suitors.
Some Poetical and Romantical Writers make valiant gal∣lant Heroics woo poorly, sneakingly, and pedlingly.
Lady, let me interrupt you; would you have gallant Heroics in their Courtships to Fair young Ladies, as Commanding as in the Field, or as Furious as in a Battle.
No, I would have them woo with a Confident Behaviour, a Noble Demeanour, a Generous Civility, and not to be amazed or to trem∣ble for fear, to weep for pity, to kneel for mercy, to sigh and be dejected
with a Mistresses frown; for though sorrow, sighs, •ears and Humility be∣come all Heroic Spirits very well, and express a Noble and Generous Soul, yet not in such a cause: for tears become all Heroic Spirits, for the Death or Torments of Friends, or for the sufferances of Innocents, or Fire∣tu, yet not if only themselves were tormented, or to dye, or• for any mis∣fortune that could come upon our own Persons or estates, or for any obstructi∣once to their own pleasures or delights, but it becomes all Heroic Spirits, to tremble for fear of their Honour, or loss of their Fame, and expresses a generous Soul to grieve and to mourn in a general Calamity, and to hum∣ble themselves to the Gods for those in distress, and to implore and kneel to them for mercy, both for themselves and others, as for to divert the wrath of the Gods; but not to weep, sigh, tremble, kneel, pray, for their Effemi∣nate pleasures, delights, or Societies; nor to grieve or sorrow for the loss of the same.
Also some Writers, when they are to describe a Bashful and Modest La∣die, such as are Nobly and Honourably bred, describe them as if they were simply shame-faced; which description makes such appear, as if they came merely from the Milk-boul, and had been bred only with silly Housewives, and that their practice was, to pick VVorms from Roots of Flowers, and their pastimes to carry and fling crumbs of Bread to Birds, or little Chick∣ens that were hatched by their Hens •heir Mothers gave them, or to gather a lapfull of sweet Flowers, to Distill a little sweet Water to dip their Han∣kerchiefs in, or to wash their Faces in a little Rose-water; and indeed, this harmless and innocent Breeding, may be Modest and Bashful, or rather shame-faced, for want of other Conversation, which Custom and Com∣pany will soon cast off, or wear out, and then print Boldness on their brow; but true modest Souls, which have for the most part Bashful Countenances, proceed• from a deep Apprehension, a clear Understanding, an ingenuous Wit, a thinking Brain, a pure Mind, a rosined Spirit, a Noble Education, and not from an ignorant obscure Breeding; for it is not Ignorance that makes Modesty, but Knowledge, nor is it Guiltiness that makes Bashful∣ness, but fear of those that are guilty; but as I said, many Writers that would make a description of Modest and Bashful women, mistake and ex∣press a shame-faced Ignorance and obscure Breeding; and instead of ex∣pressing a young Lady to be innocent of Faults, they express her to be one that is ignorant of Knowledge, so as when they would describe a Modest, Bashful, Innocent Virgin, they mistake and describe a simple ignorant shame faced Maid, that either wants Breeding or Capacity.
But Lady, let me ask you one question, would you have a young Virgin as confident and knowing as a Married Wise?
Yes, although not in their Behaviour or Condition of life, but in her Virtue and Constancy; for a chaste Married wife is as Modest and Bashful as a Virgin, though not so simple, ignorant, and shame-faced as a plain bred Maid; but as I said, Writers should describe the wooing of gal∣lant Heroics, or Great and Noble Persons, to woo with a Generous Con∣fidence, or Manly Garb, a Civil Demeanour, a Rational Discourse, to an honest Design, and to a Virtuous end, and not with a whining Voice, in pit∣tifull words, and fawning Language; and if it be only for a Mistress, as for a Courtesan, Bribes are the best Advocates, or to employ others to treat with them, and not to be the Pimp, although for themselves.
Also Writers should when they describe Noble Virgins, to receive No∣ble
Addresses of Love, and to receive those Noble Addresses or Courtships with an attentive Modesty in a bashful Countenance; and if to tremble for fear, to describe the fear, as being the Nature of the Sex; also to describe their Behaviour after a Noble Garb, and their answers to their Suitors, to be full of Reason, Sense, and Truth, and those answers to be delivered in as short discourses, and as few words as Civility will allow of, and not like an ignorant innocent, a childish simplicity, an unbred Behaviour, expressing themselves, or answering their Suitors with mincing words that have neither Sense nor Reason in them.
Also Poetical and Romantical Writers should not make great Princes that have been bred in great and populous Cities, glorious Camps; and splendrous Courts, to woo and make Love like private bred men, or like rude bred Clowns, or like mean bred Servants, or like Scholars, that woo by the Book in Scholastical Terms or Phrases, or to woo like flaunting, ranting, swearing, bragging Swaggerers, or Rusters; or to woo a Country wench, like as a Noble Lady, or great Princess.
Also not to make such women as have been bred and born Nobly and Honourably, to receive the Courtship of great Persons, like a Dairy-maid, Kitchin-maid, or like such as have been bred in mean Cottages, as to behave themselves simply, or rudely, as to the answer and speak Crossingly, or Thwartingly, as contradicting every word that is spoken unto them, as if they did believe what they said was not truth; for Civil and Honourable bred women, who have Noble and Generous Souls, will rather seem to believe all their Superlative Praises, than make Doubts, as if they knew they lied; for to make Doubts, is in the mid-way to give the Lye.
Lady, how approve you of those Lovers that kiss the Letters, Tokens, Pledges, and the like, that are sent unto them from their Lovers? or such as wear Letters, Tokens, or Pledges in their Bosoms, and next their Heart, and take them and view them a hundred times a day?
Approve it say you? you mean disapprove it; but let me tell you, most Reverend Matron, that the very hearing of it makes the sick, and the seeing of it would make me die.
I have so great an Aversion against such actions, for those actions: like as whining Speeches, proceed from filthy Amorous Love, and Mean Lovers; for true Love in Noble Persons, receives gifts as an expression of their Su∣ters, or Lovers Loves, and will carefully keep them as an acknowledgment of the receipt, and accept of them as a great Seal to their affections; yet they keep such Presents, but as Treasurers, not as Owners, until they be man and wife; neither do they make Idols of such gifts, nor do they adore the Ow∣ner the more for the gift, nor the gist for the Owner; nor do they think fit they ought to give such outward expressions of Love, by such useless actions, when as htey have a high esteem of their Suitors Love, a perfect be∣lief of their Merit, and a constant return of their affection, and a resolution to dye, or suffer any misery for their sakes if need required; besides, true Lovers have ever the Idea of their beloved in their Thoughts, by which they cannot forget their Memory, indeed Love-letters they may read often, because Letters are an enjoyment of their discourse, although their persons be at a distance, and are also a recreation and delight in their Wits, if there be any Wit th•rein, but to kiss the Paper, they neither find pleasure, delight, non
profit, neither to themselves, nor to their Beloved; the truth is, not one Writer amongst a thousand make Lovers woo either wisely, wittily, no∣bly, eloquently, or naturally; but either foolishly, meanly, unmanly, un∣handsomely, or amorously, which is corruptly.
Lady, you say very true, and some Romantical Writers, make long and tedious Orations, or long and tedious and fruitless discourse, in such times as requires sudden action.
You say right, as to speak when they a•e to fight; but for my part I hate to read Romances, or some Scenes in Plays, whose ground or Foundation is Amorous Love.
When you read such Books, you must never consider the Sub∣jest that the VVriter writes on, but consider the Wit, Language, Fancy, or Description.
Most Reverend Sister, I suppose few read Romances, or the like Books, but for the Wit, Fancy, Judgement, and lively Descriptions; for they do not read such Books, as they do read Chronicles, wherein is only to be considered the true Relation of the History.
Most Grave and Wife Matrons, I believe though none read Romances, or such like Books, whose ground is seigned Love, and Lo∣verse, as they read Chronicles, whose ground should be unfeigned Truth; yet certainly, few read Romances or the like Books, either for the Wit, Fancy, Judgement or Descriptions, but to feed their Amorous Humou•s on their Amorous Discourses, and to tune their Voice to their Amorous Strains of Amorous Love; for it is to be observed, that those Books that are most A∣morously penned, are most often read.
May it please your Worships, there is an Ancient Gen∣tlewoman that desires to speak with your VVorships.
I lay my life it is one of the Matrons of the Academy.
Faith if the Humble Bee is flown out, the rest of the Bees will follow.
I fear if they do, they will swarm about our Ears.
Yes, and sting us with their Tongues.
Let us send for her in.
I will go and Usher her in.
Gentlemen, the Ladies of the Academy have sent me unto you, to know the Reason or Cause that you will not let them rest in qniet, or suffer them to live in peace, but disturb them in both, by a confused noise of
Trumpets, which you uncivilly and discourteously blow at their Grate and Gates.
The cause is, that they will not permit us to come into their Company, but have barricaded their Gets against us, and have incloystred themselves from us; besides, it is a dangerous example for all the rest of their Sex; for if all women should take a toy in their heads to incloyster themselves, there would be none left out to breed on.
Surely it is very fit and proper that young Virgins should live a retired life, both for their Education and Reputation.
As for their Education, it is but to learn to talk, and women can do that without teaching, for on my Conscience, a woman was the first in∣venture of Speech; and as for their Retirement, Nature did never make them for that purpose, but to associate themselves with men: and since men are the chief Head of their kind, it were a sign they had but very little Brain, if they would suffer the youngest and fairest women to incloyster themselves.
Gentlemen pray give me leave to inform you, for I perceive you are in great Error of mistake, for these Ladies have not vowed Virginity, or are they incloystred; for an Academy is not a Cloister, but a School, where∣in are taught how to be good Wives when they are married.
But no man can come to woo them to be Wives.
No, but if they can win their Parents, or those they are left in trust with, and get their good liking and consent, the young Ladies have learned so much Duty and Obedience, as to obey to what they shall think fit.
But we desire the Ladies good liking, we care not for their Friends; for the approvment and good liking of their Friends, without the Love of the Ladies, will not make us happy, for there is no satisfaction in a season∣dary Love, as to be beloved for another sake, and not for their own.
If you be Worthy Gentlemen, as I believe you all are, their Love will be due to your Merits, and your Merits will persuade them to love you.
Well, if you will be our Mediator, we will surcease our Clamour, otherwise we will increase our noise.
If you can get leave of their Parents, and Friends, I will endea∣four to serve you, and shall be proud of the employment that you shall be pleased to impose to my trust and management.
And we shall be your Servants, for your favours.

